 Andrew Wiseman 
ANDREW:  I'm Andrew Leimdorfer, I work with interns who spent first two years at university and then they come back and get their degree.  I can supply some information on how to do that, but this is going to be fundamentally conversational.
ANNIE:  I'm Annie Daniel, I work at the Texas Tribune.  We typically have one intern every season.  So for summer, spring, fall.  Sometimes we'll hav multiples.  But I'm here because I spend about as much time being an intern as I have now spent in as a professional, not an intern.
So I think what we really want to do here is talk about internships very broadly, like, how do we manage them?  And how do we get there?  And what do they do?  But also what does our internship programs look like in this field?  How can we make them more equitiable?  How can we broaden the base of who we're hiring from the ground up so we're not just hiring people who live on either coast and have the means to get -- have the opportunity to live the amount of time whatever aid they get.
ANDREW:  So the format we want to do here is to kick off with a series of questions around internships, the kind of questions -- well, the questions that we put together, questions that we follow around how you might be able to put together an internship.  Or how you might approach it.  And the first part of the session what we would like to do is there's two tables, and we're going to break out into those tables.  And on your table, you will see -- you can do this in pairs or group of three or on the whole table, we print it out the questions that we put together.  And the exercise really is -- it's a -- the idea is that you put these questions -- it sounds like a conceit, and it is a conceit, but the idea is if you do that, it's an exercise that forces you to discuss why you think that question is important.
So obviously at the end of the day is just your order.  But what the idea -- if you put those things -- and this is the question that most interests us as a pair or as a group, and it will force you to think about bring your own expertise and your own experience into the exercise.
So each table should have at least one pile of pieces of paper with some questions on them.  And, y.  I mean it should be the idea that stimulates some discussion.  And then just to give you an idea.  Second half hopefully when you have your order is we'll try to do a bit of a deeper dive again in roots on the questions that you thought were the most interesting.
[Group discussion]


