This is a DRAFT TRANSCRIPT from a live session at SRCCON 2014. This transcript should be considered provisional, and if you were in attendance (or spot an obvious error) we'd love your help fixing it. More information on SRCCON is available at http://srccon.org.

Captioning by the wonderful people of White Coat Captioning, LLC
whitecoatcaptioning.com


Lightning Talks, Thursday night

>> Hi, everyone.  You're at the lighting talks.  We've got a lot to do.  I'm just going to assume everyone's here, and if not, since we got limited time, and you know, for sure the short presentations but it's going to take up a fair amount of time.  If you could just look at where you are, who's in front of you.  That would be awesome.  I'm Allen, and this is Katie.
>> Thanks for doing lighting talks.  I'll be timing people.  I'll give you a warning when you've got one minute left, and at five minutes, you're done.
>> If you have visualize with the computers there's an apple and a VGA hook-up.  If you don't have those things, you're going to have to accept that 'cause we don't have too much time to do AV stuff in between.  So, I think with that,.
>> Yeah, let's get started.
>> Tyler, take it away.
>> I'm going to talk about what DJ taught me about story telling.
>> So I started DJing in high school...
>> And I had musical talent so I figured DJing -- taking up DJing wasn't going to be all that hard.  Technically, DJ's not really that hard.  Musically, all a DJ really does is sync tempos of songs, and match the key, or the tonal center of songs.  You match two songs together, and suddenly you're DJing.  There's more to it than that, but you know, that's the basic art, and computers make this trivially easy, they'll do all the work for you.  So my friend Peter and I started talking to the DJ class above us to see if we could start doing some of the parties and they agreed to let us take half of the first parties that we did father-in-law so Peter and I decided to split and a half again.  So, night came.  I went first, I got set up, I started my set, eager to blow my pierce's minds and no such thing happened.  The crowd lingered about 90 seconds through my awkward rap choices and then they shuffled off the dance floor unable to dance to what I was playing.  Eventually, the older student, the more experienced DJ dame to me, and said, dude, just play Umbrella.  This was 2008.  I begrudgingly obliged and everyone came to the dance floor dancing.  So my first lesson, pop music is fucking awesome, and like all good stories, a DJ set notes to empathize.  So another detail about my boarding school.  The 200 students at my school came from about 75 different countries.  Needle to say in synthesizing be he began to understand the rhythms much reggaeton, so the bottom bass to bowl wood.  My sets started incorporating all these different things and I I communicated -- while they came with their own tastes and inclinations, part of the school's mission and part of my mission as a DJ was to introduce all these other different styles into one cohesive story.  This interrogation, and you know, I'm -- integration, I'm still introduction music that they didn't know, that they didn't know how to dance to.  But it differed from my original set where I was playing my favorites because playing a bowl wood tune or a reggaeton tune, it impassioned them.  It allowed them to tell my story from my decisions.  So, you know what about story telling?  Story telling and stories are about your audience.  You can't tell a story without considering who it is for.  Later in life, as a developer and not a DJ, I encountered user centered design and it felt natural because I DJed parties on a hill in New Mexico, thanks.  We have Emmy up next.
>> I just have one visual. can I just sneak up on a website?
>> Yeah, you can assuming that I can turn this back on.
>> I don't stand behind podiums.  Little too structured for me.  Am I on time?  So this is going to be super, super fast lighting talk, I believe in the lighting talks.  Good afternoon who don't though, I'm the editor in residence at the D school in Stanford, I've incident last ten months basically figuring out what design is, but prior to that, I was an editor at the Washington Post, it was a ferryifyingly structured job.  Will she and I thought I had made it.  That was my destination.  Editor bring 4:30 goal achieved.  I was a homeowner, my life was stable.  I got an invitation to go to Stanford, to assume this little role of editor in residence.  And I thought okay, I'll take a sabbatical.  An is he balance cat before 40, mission accomplished and I got there and realized, the destination is not enough.  Fly displaced my entire life, moved across the country, and didn't really realize what I had done and can now, I'm going to be in Stanford for another year because I can't imagine just yet going to a newsroom yet.  So I -- now I have no notes.  I have not repaired anything for this speech.  I like to do this with absolutely no preparation whatsoever.  Because I just think it's more genuine that way and it's more fun and one of the things that we really believe in at the D school that you're constantly uncomfortable.  And in that state of uncomfortableness you can give unforeseen.  My job was also to create there is this.  I did it with the help of Sarah Sam son who was actually he or she.  This was her design and I loved doing this and I loved the bluing and I loved the work.  But it's a destination and again, a destination is not enough.  I want to create new tools for story telling I want to create new things I want to introduce how we can tell stories differently and in ways where we meet neurotransmitters where they are in process and not when they're done with process.  So for me, it's like my entire life has been getting from place to place, destination to destination.  I got into high school, I got into college, I even got into graduate school twice.  I got a job, I made a blog but now I want a journey but thousand I hope you guys want to come with me.  If you want to keep to D let me know and I'll be happy to post you.






  What the hell are we doing?  This is Stan.  I'm norma.  So here's what we do.  It's very, it's kind of difficult to explain but there's Stan's raw steno coming up on the screen.  I wish we could quack I wanted to show you a picture and if you Google, steno keyboard layout, it'll tell you what's on the keys.  Rather than typing, it's nothing -- please don't say, "Typings."  We are not typing.  We are writing steno, more like, it's more like writing chords on a piano than anything like typing.  We're writing word-by-word or syllable by syllable, worst comes to absolute worse, we have to write it -- spell it out, you know, letter-by-letter but no, I'd rather die.  Stan is very good.  And Stan -- your jobs this.  But you know, San Francisco can be mobile, he can be in a museum.  What we -- we normally do this for deaf and hard of hearing people.  So, we, you know, this is opening up doors for a lot of people who want to go to museums, who've been hard of hearing, have not been able to understand what the presentations say.  Stan does this sort of stuff.  I don't.  I just sit in my little chair and do my thing which is enough.  When I interviewed Stan, I had a string of ugh, abysmal interviews of just really bad interferes, and uber, they either -- interferes and they either had something wrong with them, and it was either personality but mostly it was skills.
[ Laughter ]
And I mean, you really do have to be a people person.  A lot of what we do is --
[ Laughter ]
We work for college students who are deaf and hard of hearing.  That's a lot of what we do.  So you really kind of have to have the people part, as well.  So when I interviewed Stan, I had been, I was pretty depressed, and he was pretty hot shit.  Like, really amazing.  And, um, and so okay, I'm interviewing him by Skype and I pulled up, have you ever heard of vie heart?  VIhart
           But I was once at a conference where they played and I I'm considered pretty okay at the steno game but vih -- and I said, hey, Stan, you know, have you ever heard of vihart, and I said Google her, and he did, and he pulled up a YouTube video and I said, just start listening to this and tell me what do you do well he happened to have his steno machine looked hooked up and we had the same stream text that we used at the conference today and he started writing it, and I went you're hired.  He's motiving.  He's so fast, and he's just such a natural.  And -- and -- and he taught himself steno.  That's the most amazing part.  This talk wasn't really meant to be all and Stan.  It wasn't really meant to be about what we do.  It's appeal, you know, you guys are not the only coders.  We're coders, as well.  Decree, so I've been on a Beltway of a rush lately.  A little while appearing, this story came out in New York, there was a tarantula missing in one of the neighborhoods of Brooklyn that I lived in and so I was a little in Brooklyn, and so that sort of, it sort of took me down a path, Mr. I had done this, actually, I had ended up sort of cropping the at a ranch la image so that I would.  And did a Google image search which, basically rather than searching for text terms, you can upload an image have have Google match it, which I embarrassingly found out through the show cat fish if anyone's seen that.  But it got me thinking.  Oh, yeah -- I had not seen this before like five minutes ago.  So, um, but then, so it wasn't much longer, not much later actually when the Malaysia airline crash happened.  And it was sort of on my mind and it sort of came to a head because this tweet came out that showed footage of the crash of the Malaysiaian airlines and it was actually from the TV show lost and someone photoshopped the Malaysia airlines and actually if you put that into Google images it's abundantly clear that it's actually an actual real image but still it was retweeted 4,000 times.  And even before during the World Cup and there's a website called tin eye which actually does something very similar to Google image search
>> They were first.
>> And they were actually the only one.  And that was the only one that actually has an API.  And I could show, this was sort of an info thing and it didn't work very well.  And so there we go.  Basically, made a, um, browser plug-in that sort of interfaces are tweet deck that when you load up an image will show you this box underneath any photo on Twitter oof it's done tin eye API search to see if a similar image was found and so this was againen the same day there were no images found, so yeah, that.  It's still not guaranteed that it's a genuine image but it's at least a hint that it is.  But if you go and look at the lost one after the checks, the first time that this single was seen it was in 2012.  It gives a link to that source from 2012 which is on Getty Images.  So I'm basically, I'm trying to work out a way to be able to sort of, pool resources, someone's going to have to pay some money at some point but hopefully somebody else can use it somehow.  So I'm here talking about this in the hope that some people out there have some bright ideas and want to talk about it.
>> Yes, you should talk to John Ressig because he's actually using it for one of his projects because it was civic-related.
>> You know, I emailed him.  And I said, can image I do a non-profit thing.  And he said no.
>> You should talk to John Ressig.
>> Well, okay, that's done.
[ Laughter ]
>> But if anyone would feel to talk about it.  I think it's something that, it feels very achievable.  I think it would be very useful, so yeah.  That's that.
>> Great.
>> Do you need visualize?
>> No.
>> Actually maybe I'll draw something on the whiteboard.  Can you bring the screen up?  Is there Kleenex?  I'm going to wipe it off.  It's going to pop, like, right around here.  Let's see, what else.  I think about it.  Let's see if I can do a little...
>> One minute.
>> All right, we're waiting.
>> Aww!
>> I remember I did this on Q before.  Hold on...
>> Yeah!
>> Whooooo!
>> All right!
>> What?
>> I will note he did that with two seconds left.
>> All right, next up, we have Millie.
>> I'll just... use your computer.
>> Awesome.
>> Ay really have no qualifications to do this, other than to say that I make a pot of rice a lot -- maybe, like, five times a week. how to make a perfect pot of rice.  There was kind of this big article in New York Times last week and it was very controversial but it's very easy to make a perfect pot of rice.  And as Noah said, ingredients are the more important part. -- most important part.  I'm biased, so use whereas minute rice.  It's the most fragrant.  So as you get your rice, put it in your pot.  You'll you'll use the first knuckle of your dissection finger and you'll want -- of your index fingers and you'll want the rice to about your first knuckle and you'll want to rinse the rice.  So this part is also very devicive.  There's one camp that believes the more you rinse it, the better it is because that's the part when the surface gluten, or the surface starch comes off and the other camp believes at a.  I'm in the former camp, wash it until the water's, like, mostly clear.  That's maybe 4 inches.  You can probably get -- rinses, but you can probably get by with two.  Instead of putting your finger down to the bottom of the pot, you'll want it to the top of the rice, and you'll want to fill it again, to the top knuckle.  If you grew up, maybe in a western home you might have learned, cooking rice, water's twice.  That's another thing but use the finger.  And it's foolproof.  After that, you'll want to let it boil, don't cover it.  And then,and then once it boils, cover it, and put it on for about 15 minutes.  And then don't stir, don't touch it.  Just let it be.  People think that you have to stir it.  Just walk away.  When you come back, you'll have have an perfect set bowl of rice.  The reason that I'm biased towards Jasmine rice is because it burns very well so if you want a crispy underpiece, put it for 20 minutes.  And I'm not kidding, burnt rice is a delicacy.  And that's how you make a perfect pot of rice.
>> Chris Chang and then Derek?  Do you need a visual?
>> No.
>> Do you --
>> I'm going to start.  This is about four sayingings -- two of them are original, maybe two and a half are original, and one I stole off Twitter but they are sayings that I say around the office and they've settled many arguments.  First one is, "Do the thing that we've already done unless we can do it lazier."  And so this is when you're solving a new problem.  If you've already solved it in the past, just reuse the same solution that you did before unless, you know of a way to do it even lazier.  So a lot of times there'll be like a -- a lot of fights about, "No we're going to do it this way, or that way.  "and in the end, you just pick the one that's laziest.  And the other one that I've recently -- the newest one is if you test it -- no, "If you like it, you better put a test on it."  Except you don't say it like that.  You say it, "If you like it, then you gotta put a test on it..."
>> Yes!
>> But the idea is, there's so many developers, everyone's editing everyone else Oz code, if you accidentally break someone else's code and they didn't write a test for it, it's okay, because... it's like, they didn't care enough about that code to write a test for it, so it's okay, it broke.  And the third thing that I say around the office is, "We can definitely suck as much as we want to."  The idea is, don't write everything in ourselves.  If there's a third-party service with a good API just use that and we'll just use the API to get the data.  So, just -- lots of "sucking" around the office.  And the office.  And the fourth one is a taco bell future.  Which is not more of an anaphorism, but what we're working for.  Remember in demolition man, can a to bell is the finest restaurant of the future so the idea is, when you ever a huge, monolithic site that we do and you write something and you change CSS2 years from now, and it broke the thing from the past, then, like, that's a problem so the idea, all right, so we'll freeze it just like Sylvester Stallone, and it'll always be in the state that we deployed it.  So, we make the app, we launch is, and then, um, soon afterwards, we'll um, archive it.  Right now, we use W-get script to archive it to S-3.  And then we switch it over so that you're always serving out the frozen version off S-3.  There's like a little reverse proxy in front that does that job.  And the idea is, if you unfreeze it, and it breaks, then, like you may end up in a world where taco bell is the king of the restaurant industry but that's the world -- that's the risk you take when you freeze something.  You can always throw it back in the freezer and work on it again but the idea is that, with the taco bell future, like, apps don't break
[ Laughter ]
Don't let your old data visualizations break because you changed something.  That's it.
[ Applause ]
>> After Derek is Frederick.  Okay, cool.  So I'm here to talk about get rebase.  This is not the get rebase talk that you think it is.  I'm not here to hate you.  I'm here to share a personal story about get rebase.  And any diversification that you get from this is not -- there's more here than I thought would be, and that's great.  So let's see how you can revise your past in order to change your future.  So, I have a website and I, um, you know, it's Monday.  And Monday's where we all start, and I knew these -- I put it up on my website because I need to get a new job, and so, I've been fixing on the header, because I've got a header and things.  But actually I think I'm going to make a branch as we do.  And, and, and I -- I want to look professional, you know on my header.  And so I'm just going to change a few quick things because I don't have much time here... to...
[ Laughter ]
Now, it's Wednesday.  So Wednesday I decided I needed to do some more work.  And so, you know, I have a list of things I need to do, and I'm good at, you know, it's a little out of date and so I need to update that.  And so I make a branch as you do.  And -- and so, there -- these are things that I'm good at, but no one uses things like check and more, so I'm just going to update that.  And you know one thing that I'm really good at right now, you know, I don't know, ruby, whatever.  Maybe that'll make me employable.  So let's just keep that, and let's just keep that other one.  And, and so, and now, it's Friday and so on Friday what I do as all Fridays and what I'm doing today is I go out for drinks and I come back and make commits on get.  And, and when I have -- and I have a few drinks, I get crazy.  And I get -- a little desperate and I make a terrible, terrible lie.  And... and I do something I will regret in the morning.  Because I don't know anything about this.  And so, it's Saturday morning... and I wake up not remembering anything about the night and all I have is any git history to go by.  And I look and I see that something terrible has happened.  And I can't just, like, get reset hard, you know?  I don't know what I did last night.  I'm not capable of anything.  You know, I had mind complex systems like, people's lives are on the stake here.  But wait... I think.  I can create a revisionist history.  And so -- and so I smile to myself.  And I start to look and see what I'm doing.
>> One minute.
>> And I realize that with this power I can change history.  And I -- and I need to remember how this works again.
[ Laughter ]
And I need to take what I did before
[ Laughter ]
-- and put it into what I did then and then I need to type in the magic words and I need to just, you know, append a few things here and there.  And I know now what I need to do.  And... and so I've successfully deleted the evidence.  And it's Monday.  Thank you.
>> This is a metaphor for journalism today.
[ Laughter ]
And I thought it would be funny.  Musical instruments create sound by vibrating columns of air.  Most musical instruments are symmetrical like a trumpet or a drum or a bell and when they are, they create a pleasing sound.  When that column is created by an instrument that's not symmetric, the sound is terrible so when a bell cracks, it sounds absolutely horrible.  That's why, you know, you hear the you don't hear the Liberty Bell sound virtually ever and that's why when this crack happened, you think, they took the Liberty Bell out of service and it came a symbol of America.  This bell is two and a half blocks away, that way.  I suggest that you go take a look at it.  It's in a museum behind glass, a gigantic glass window here so that you can see it any time day or night.  Go down and have an look.  What you think happened is, this bell was sounded and this crack formed here and then the bell sounded horrible and wasn't used again, that's not true.  This is not a crack from the Liberty Bell that made it sound bad.  That is a gap that was made by people to fix the crack that happened when the bell was struck the bell was cast in 1752, I believe, and the crack that happened was a hairline crack and the problem with a hairline crack is, when you have a bell like this, the two sides are rubbing up against each other and when that happens, you don't have a symmetric instrument -- air-vibrate be surface.  So to eliminate that, people in the colonies drilled out the crack and created this gap and they drilled, drilled, drilled, and drilled up to here.  And then they put in these two bolts to hold each side of the Liberty Bell together.  So, both sides of the bell would vibrate at the same rate.  That was the fix of the Liberty Bell.  That's not a crack that's a gap.  That gap was then put back into service with the two bolts holding it together.  And on the very first strike, to resound the Liberty Bell several hundred years ago, a new crack developed and that crack is still there and it is right up here and it goes like that.  And, it was so definitive in compromising the construction of that bell, that it could not be drilled out again because if they did, the whole bell would fall apart.  So that's why the bell was taken out of service and the Liberty Bell is not cracked in the way you think it is.  It's cracked just a very, very different way and you can see it today.  Thank you.
[ Applause ]
>> Um, so before I start, I want to do a Pro Bono applaud for the foodies' room, they have enough liquor for everyone in this room.  So, so much -- yeah, they lied.  It's not food.... there but before I start, the background of my talk is that I'm a designer, a front-end developer working at a tech company.
           Shit...
           
>> So while that warms up, so I work at a newspaper.  And we have a problem of actually publishing the stories that we've worked on, like, how do we get our interactive projects onto S-3 which is a weird problem because it's a very simple way to think.  It's not a like a rails app where you have to have this system but we have this issue we're publishing all these flat projects and we want to make sure that exactly what's published is exactly what's on our GitHub repo and it's all synced up and all that.  So I built this thing called kestral and I want to talk about it because I want to see if it's helpful to other people and it has some bugs in it, and I wanted to see we wanted to work on it.  So here's your website.  It looks like this.  It was loaded on, like, local host.  It looks like that.  There she so what you do, all the commands start with swoop 'cause it's like a bird that watches your repo and when it changes, it reflects your changes.  So it has a few components, so you go like swoop in it, and then that will create a GitHub repo.  This was here, like, on a-jam kestral test.  So we have done this before.  And now it exists and it's empty and it created a web room.  So we're going to have, like, a server that's going to watch this GitHub repo and then update changes and so we have initialize git, so it initialized repo.  It set the origin to the thing.  And it's repeated and repeated.  And once it pushes we create the search here.  There she so let's just add everything and do init and then we'll push here.  Wait for that to go.  So you can see it's all here.  And the second part of it, so that's like the can liner face.  There she so the second part of it is, the server you have here running.  Pay no attention to the IP address.  It's behind a and you can check out, like, my branch, any commit level.  Pretty informal.  If you then wanted to publish it, you would do swoop, deploy -- spell it correctly.  And it would ask you, like, if you wanted to go to the staging server, or the abrupt server, it goes to, like, different s-3 buckets.  Staging particular so you can either do syncing or overwrite.  So something's wrong with the S3 server and then you do sync.  So how it works it reads the commit messages that it pushes to GitHub for a particular string that you set and if that sets.  It syncs it to s3, and if not, it's just just a normal commit,.
>> Over an hour and a half during the opening, this was part of a larger show, so at the opening reception for the show, I performed just the departures that happened just in that specific hour familiar from O'Hare, correct me if I'm wrong logically, all with a handwritingly cheat sheet.  Chronological.
>> Wool wire and string that took up about the length of this room over a month in a museum space.  And plotted it to one side of map of Internet access which I found IP addresses and also, Internet exchange points and physically drew them with little shiny mylar dots and then hand-drawn circles for different percentages of IPO much of address allocation on a map on one side of the wall, on the other side, I had a text array map of all the popular searches from Google something like that Geist and Twitter zeitgeist and Twitter.  And I have other ones that are more data driven.  The other one I made the universe using thousands of tiny metal nets.  And also, I like to use mirrors a lot to play with your sense of space.  I had a totally dark mirror on a dark floor.  And I was simulating universes over and over again to kind of think about the scientific method and the intense effort and the stamina and vision of running an experiment over and over again to try and figure something out.  And the audience could also walk into the universe in between shifts.  I do that one for about three hours at a time.  They're very labor speeches.  They are very visual.  They intensive.  They're super esoteric to most people.  So my work gives them, like, a direct material, spatial, and oftentimes, an experience of that so that's kind of to turn it into a direct, interpretive experience rather than an abstraction, three levels removed experience for them.  So that's kind of my spiel.  And this is almost done, it's just going to do a couple of different pans.  Now I'm learning to code because it's really, really ridiculous to be hand-compiling large amounts of data.  And I'm really glad to be here, thank you.
>> Okay, this is going to be exciting, hopefully.  This is mainly going to be me trying to tell you about part of my linguistics degree that I haven't done in ten years, so we'll see how this goes.  So, most people are familiar with English, presumably here in this room.  Most people probably aren't familiar with the lamda calculus how many people in the room radio?  Most people in the room, either programming languages like lisp, or Javascript, or things like they've read the Wikipedia page on what the y-compenator is, so it's not an angel investment thing.  It's -- so lamdas are typically marked with so you'll see something like this.  And we're going to explain this using plain English.  Now the interesting parts about what -- what linguistics introduced in the 80s is -- figured out in the 80s is you can actually represent English using logical formalisms so that allows you -- so the quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dog.  Okay, so most of us have been through exercises where you have to diagram sentences and figure out what the internal structure is.  Now, the -- so everybody's seen, you know, charts that look kind of like this that denote what the structure of the sentence ends up being.  And, um, the kind of neat thing that you can actually do is figure out, like, so how does the structure of the sentence actually match up with the meaning, right?  There are pieces within here, that, you can kind of conceptually see and you can swap out.  And so we can say the quick brown fox jumped over the lazy cat.  And, um, you can actually think about all -- you can break up all of these sentences into smaller chunks and actually represent individual pieces.  So, you know, the world is represented, so it has a whole bunch of different things in it but we can categorize them down into smaller pieces, right, dogs are not the same as foxes.  You can represent all the things in the world as a set and you can actually talk about dogs as an individual subset of all of the set of things.  But they can you can also say, you can restrict the all the possible dogs to lazy dogs and you want to be able to represent each one of these pieces as a higher-level thing.  So, um, one of the things that you can do if you want to try and represent both the structure and the meanings of these sentences.  Everybody knows, like, okay, a dog is a common noun.  You can talk about the lazy dog as a noun phrase and, one of the ways that you can kind of intuitively think about lamdas is actually as basically modifiers on top of the set of all the things.  So, a dog is a -- dogs were a set of things in the world.  You can talk about, um, lazy dogs and, the lazy dog as a higher-level structure.  So, um, if you imagine the set of all things as dogs you can actually say -- you can actually start talking about adjectives as modifiers on top of the set of dogs.  So you can say something like Íx, lazy x.  And then, apply that, specifically to a dog, okay?  So, what this means is, you've got a set of things that are dogs and now you can denote the way the set of lazy dogs.  In this particular case, if you think of dogs as a set of objects, what this function basically -- you can describe lazy as a function on all the dogs.  So now, you can talk about "lazy" as a single object.  And, it's got a particular type, right.  It takes dog as a particular input and denotes a particular set of objects so now the interesting part about this is, is now if I want to say the extremely lazy dog, what does that actually mean, right?  So we can represent "extremely" as a lamda function that takes adjectives and says, "Extremely," "extremely P."  So the interesting part now is we can also take extremely and apply it to quick.  You can talk about adverbs as a function on top of adjectives that take dogs or some sort of noun as an argument so you can represent each one of the pieces in the sentence as a function that, eventually maps down to nouns and real things in the world.  So when you look at a sentence like this, you can actually say, the quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog -- does that actually match a set ever circumstances in the world?  If I were to put the quick brown unicorn jumped over the lazy dog, we can say definitively that that sentence is not true because unicorns aren't things that exist in the world.
>> Ooh!
>> All right.
>> Controversial!
>> Is that it?
>> Yup.
[ Applause ]
>> We have Lorie, and then Michael and then Brian are the last ones.
>> You killed it, unicorn!
>> More than one.  There's a reason I'm a programmer.
>> Well, that's a nice segue right there.
>> I want to thank you.  And challenge...
>> I am a data scientist and I am from Chicago.
[ Laughter ]
  My talk is unicorn bootcamp, you want me to teach what to who, and how long to whom, excuse me.
>> So yeah, I was a social/numeral scientist and I didn't want to be an academic anymore and I found out about data scientist and I said, can I be one and they said yes.  And I said, what she I start doing.  And I started learning some stuff a lot of people and it used to be way easier to learn stuff when I started teaching people and then I started the idea of a data boot camp and they said yes, and I immediately said, oh, crap.  So we've been designing a data science boot camp and it's from a company called Kaplan Medis and it's going to be this fall in New York City applications are open, and it's really exciting.  But we wanted to find out what the heck to and the reason that I wanted to become a data scientist was because I wanted to do cool stuff with fewer restrictions and that's what we do in principle with our company and this will hopefully be not an exception if we manage to pull it off.  So we had to figure out what to do.  So we've got 12 weeks to train people to be data scientists and another thing I like is not being bored.  So, that was another principle we brought.  So what kind of data boot camp not bore me as a hypothetical student and will not bore me as an instructor and also if I'm training someone, if I think of training, I think of repetition what are we going to repeat to train people to become data scientists, you know, that we want to hire at the end of two weeks.  So we thought of what you would do on the jobs.  So he made that into the class.  So we made this model.  What is a data scientist, what is a data science project and I think the common things that people think about are what are the imprisonments, the machinery -- algorithms, what data are you going to do it to, and what tools are you going to do it in.  You mean, those are great but that's not the whole thing and it's not even the parts that are frequently the parts that are most exciting to me.  You have to know what question you're answering and that the the thing that you're doing is going to answer the question that you're asking.  And the people that you're communicated that to have done what -- and that's what a project is.  So we took those 12 weeks, and again, we gave them code names.  Again, don't bore yourself.  So we said TV detectives, we can think of a lot of them and that's our final class.  So we started, like, with a simple one and we started getting more complicated and students get more independent.  By the last one it's like the passion project and with each of those ones.  And so far I'm like this sounds pretty cool and so we presented that to the client and they said great, so who can take your course?  You know?  Data scientists?  Grow them into real ones and you know, we have to make a press release.  You have to market this thing.  I mean like who is our audience and I was, like, God this is hard.  So I love -- what I love about my job is we come from different backgrounds, you know?  It's not a bunch of -- we didn't all come from the same program.  We're all bringing perspectives to a problem and it's fun.  So I was, like, so, how inclusive we be?  How can I responsibly say, if you're excited, if you do this job, I think you can get there in these 12 weeks.  So we had to think about what are those what do you have to end up with at the end?  What do data scientists have that make them data scientists?  So we made another model and we had to carve the unicorn and so we came up with this model.  I don't know if you can see it, but kind of, like, three, skills-based, and kind of like three, personality-based components of being a data scientist.  So you have to -- it's a code -- sorry.  Everybody -- gotta be able to write some code.  You need to be able to do statistics and machine learning and, um, communication.  So, talking about what you did.  There are people who can code, some crazy stats and explain to someone exactly as smart as them, or more smart what they have done but if they have to explain it to their aunt, it might not be that comfortable or productive.  There she so communication's a big deal.  And, um, authorized to get there, in order to do the job well, I think that you have to be creative.  You know, you have to be able to fit solutions to problems.  You have to be in a new situation and make something up, and make a lot of stuff up.  You have to be curious because all of this stuff is way too painful if you're not driven to find out what the answer is, kind of internally.  And, you have to have grit because again all this stuff hurts and you have to ticking on, and if you don't know what's ticking.  You have to Google stuff in front of people, and say you don't know.  So, that is what we came up with.  So at the end, that was the end.  So, that's our data science boot camp, and so we were looking for people that can show us that they have the capacity for these skill set so you need to bring us a little bit of proof.  We've made some heuristics on how much programming and how much statistics.  But are you going to hit the ground running with us?  And is this what you really want to do or is this the sexist career of the 21st century with a nice paycheck attached so with this we want to do.
>> Z not boring, and useful.  And it helps me to talk about it with people like you.  So thank you so much for listening.
>> While there's switchover happening, I think you're coming close to finishing, yeah?
>> This is the last one.
>> Man, I'm psychic.  I knew you should come in.
>> Once you guys are done.  You're welcome to head downstairs.  There's still ice cream, and beer and fun to be had until 9:00.  And so when you're done, head on down but it seems to have been fantastic and I know these are --
>> Hi, I'm Michael, oh, wait, no -- I'm Brian.  Cheers.  So this is going to be interesting.  I'm Brian, this is Michael.  We do this thing called CSV sound system and we've done this for two years, people meeting up for programming.  And and every week we send out an email, and every email is kind of a Weird Al, yankovic coding nerdy sense.  There she and an example of this has been the Fresh Prince of my MacBook Air.  Pulps, comma, people, any others?
>> I want to hack with somebody?
>> When you hear this.
>> And but the one we always come back to is our favorite by our namesake, LCD Sound System, which is snowfall, I love you, but you're bringing me down at me and so tonight we are going to sing this for you.  We are hoping that you will sing along.  And you know -- if you know the.
>> LEE:  
>> We couldn't program the bouncing ball in time 'cause we had --
>> But we've never done this before outside of the context of me singing Michael to sleep.
>> These are the lyrics.
>> Brian programmed the song earlier today, and we're going to program that, as background accompaniment because there was no karaoke please join us.
>> 
