This is a DRAFT TRANSCRIPT from a live session at SRCCON 2014. This transcript should be considered provisional, and if you were in attendance (or spot an obvious error) we'd love your help fixing it. More information on SRCCON is available at http://srccon.org.

Captioning by the wonderful people of White Coat Captioning, LLC
whitecoatcaptioning.com


7/25/14
Session 34, How to train your newsroom.
Session Leaders:  Jaeah Lee and Tasneem Raja

  >>We're going to get started.  Could somebody get the door maybe in the back?  So we're here to talk about newsroom training.  Just a couple of housekeeping things, if you want to open up the etherpad where we've put some burning questions, a little bit of a guide to what we're hoping to do in this conversation today, it's bit.ly/train-your-newsroom.  So you can check that out.  

We wanted to start out here by introducing ourselves, telling you very briefly about what we do.  And you know, as we said in the session discussion, we're really trying to learn from you guys, as well as sharing with you some of the things we've picked up as you go.  Feel free to jump in.  This is meant to be very participatory.  

My name is Jaeah, we're both at Mother Jones Magazine on the data team there, and I started in my job about two years ago, at which point there were still plenty of reporters and editors in our newsroom who did not know what a column or a row in a spreadsheet was, and so because we were fairly short-staffed, really short-staffed...
>> It's us.
>> Yeah, it's just the two of us.  Two and a half for some time, and we're attempting to expand our team, but nonetheless, we have tons of ideas that come through the pipeline on a daily basis, so in trying to figure out ways to not have to constantly be churning out charts and behaving solely like a service desk, we tried to figure out ways early on, you know, and with Tasneem's leadership to seed these skills throughout the newsroom, and to start, you know, in somewhat sneaky ways, just saying, well, did you know that you could add these 10 columns not by hand but by using a very simple sum function, and it kind of started out from there and bloomed into more formal regular weekly skills training sessions where we -- Tasneem convinced the company to pay for pizza once a week.
>> Food!
>> And with free food we drew in more and more members of the newsroom to come and watch us, just go through some, you know, we the staked with very basic exercises, in Google spreadsheets and how to use Google docs to making charts in illustrator to how to use the command line and not be afraid of it, and now that series has been taken over by our public affairs department, which not just includes skills training from us, but from different departments throughout Mother Jones, so you know, sometimes our fundraising team will come in and talk to the rest of the company about the rest of the organization about how to -- how they do their work.  Or it could be a reporter who focuses on long form journals and talking about deconstructing a piece that he had recently written, how he went about the reporting.  So it's become something much larger than what our team started out offering, and it's just been a really beautiful thing and we've managed to train in bits and pieces now that we've been kind of able to lay a foundation for that.
>> One of the things I often say is what we really do, you know, I mean our job titles are I'm interactive editor, Jaeah is interactive producer, but I think the real secret superpower that we have brought to the newsroom is the training.  And it's sort of the unseen thing, right?  I feel it doesn't get talked about as much as it needs to be in these discussions of how we're doing the work we do.  There's a lot of things that I think are common across all newsrooms, big and small.  I mean training is training in a lot of ways, right, but I'm interested in hearing from you guys a little bit more about how you're tackling this, whether you're talking about training, maybe somebody knew that's come on to your team and getting them up to speed or maybe something like we did maybe at a much bigger space where you're trying to speed skills, maybe some basic checklist of skills which is something we're going to try to develop today, across like maybe not -- I guess maybe 20 people in our case, but maybe 50 people or even more, 100 people.  So before we dive in, I'm going to take a quick survey from you guys, just so we can get a sense of what we're working with here.
>> I wanted to just ask a couple questions, and then tell you what we're hoping to walk away with, so just want to ask you guy, for how many of you -- the two choices here are going to be, is training like a key part of your mandate and mission?  I mean your mandate from you know, your on high to what you believe you want to be doing?  Or is it kind of like a nice to have, you know, something that you've felt either asked to contribute or you know, necessarily felt like if I don't do this, I can't do my job effectively, more of a nice to have.  So for how many of you would you say training is, and you who are helping facilitate training is a part of your mandate or your mission?  Oh, wow, OK.  That's cool.  And for how many of you is it more of like something that if you can get this, it's a nice to have?  OK, that's really interesting.  I was not expecting that.
>> and I also wanted to ask, for how many of you do you already have something that you're trying, whether it's formal or informal, you know, something really big or kind of small?  Or are you starting from scratch here?  So for how many of you already kind of have something that you're trying?
>>
>> OK.  And so the rest of you are kind of starting from scratch?  Is there anything else?  Anything in between.
>> We have intentions.
>> That is a great place to start.
>> Yeah.
[laughter]
>> That's nice, I like that.
>> Two things we want to walk away with, here.  Jaeah, if you want to talk about some of this stuff?
>> Yeah, so the first thing we'd love to sort of give you guys to walk away with and for us, really for selfish reasons, is a checklist of what do we think are the baseline skillset that everyone in the newsroom should have?  And you know, I guess depending on where you work and what role you stand in, that could be every reporter editor or maybe it goes even further beyond the editorial team.  And then secondly, you know, we definitely want to learn about what methods, tried and true or that have completely failed, that you guys have tested and just kind of talk about those lessons learned from each other, and any like tips for dos and don'ts for how to go about these things.
>> Yeah, so just wanted to start opening up the discussion to all of us, we'll throw out some questions just to keep things moving.  One that we want to start with is hear from you guys what the obstacles are, like what's making it hard to fulfill those intentions of training and making them into a real problem, is this a culture problem, is this a technical problem, it's probably a little bit of both so we'd like to hear what some of you are up against.
>> Time problem.  I don't think we really have a culture or technical problem, but just a time problem.
>> We absolutely had, like our team used to be for people -- we had a big meeting with the newsroom to talk about like what we're for, so that we were trying to get out of the service desk, thing, as well, and all the reporters from the newsroom were like yes, we would love training.  Like everybody is hon board with this, our boss thinks it's a great idea.  It's just we haven't had any time.
>> and it's because you're trying to do the day to day production of the stuff while also figuring out?
>> We do actually sometimes people come to us and say like, hey, can you help me with this spreadsheet and in some cases we'll say instead of just doing it for them, we'll say can I show you how to do this?  So there's one or two people who are creeping along.
>> and is it also a problem of getting their time.
>> I don't know yet.
>> Yeah.
>> How does it usually work, like the mechanics of it?  Do they approach you by email or phone or in person and say I have this dataset?  What do they come to you with.
>> We have a standup every morning that we do our thing and it's open so the kind of practice that we've gotten people into is come to the standup and tell us what you're working on but we also just sometimes have people email us and say I've got this thing.
>> Kind of like a rule that we've sort of instituted is to think of every point of contact as a potential training opportunity.  And figuring in how to subtly sneak in, it's like the kids how to eat their vegetables thing, oh, yeah, I want to show up the formula that I used to generate those numbers because I think you might be interested and then having them see it and practice a couple of times, I feel like that's so much of the hurdle.  It's just that they've literally never looked at some of these interfaces and we've all been there, like it's kind of just having them look at it is so effective.
>> I work with different newsrooms who are onboarding their teams into word processing type of thing and I often ask how do you dies do it and I feel like many different ways and like one is just like people are curious and sort of one-on-one, where it's like oh, my gosh you're doing such cool stuff and how do you do that.  And someone.  Mails you and then they're like oh, show me how to do this.  And the other thing is mass newsroom adoption where he's like one person he's designated editorial liaison, and he actually gets a room of like 20 computers and they sit down and they sign up together and they walk through it and it's like this huge process and they spend like weeks and weeks and people fly out to different cities to do this and on the flip side like we're writing some documentation, we're going to email it out to you and figure it out and that's the end of it and there's such a wide spectrum and it's so dependent on how corporate the  newsroom or how grassroots the newsroom is or how we just don't give a shit, just figure it out on your own the newsroom is.
>> I feel like what you're getting at, too, is it's a cultural thing, it's a time issue, it's how much can you afford to spend on it, and you know, any time, I mean we spend a lot of time training and probably a little bit less so today, than we did two years ago.  But I mean in large part it was for us I think a big hurdle is the perception issue, you know, kind of what you were getting at, people always thought that, oh, it's so difficult, like, whatever sort of data work I do, and they didn't want to mess with anything and so our job was to kind of almost tell a white lie and say, like this is so easy and cool and look how awesome it looks and you can do this, too, and there was a lot of hand-holding in the beginning to where eventually, you know, at some point people did realize that, OK, this isn't as easy as you made it out to be, but they kind of, at that point was convincing them to stick with it and you know, kind of telling them, all right, it's not going to be easy your first time, but if you keep doing this type of work, it will get easier.  And enough people, I think we've kind of reached a critical mass where enough people have realized that to be true and so there's definitely less of a fear now.
>> and they're training each other.  We see them training each other, it's really cute.  Yeah.  Yeah.  For those of you who have programs of your own, we'd love to hear a little bit of what that looks like, you know in terms of what just what are the points of contact and so on.
>> I think that a big thing that is often missed is as you said before, kind of working into the -- a lot of times a journalist might say hey, come do this for me I don't know what I'm doing.  And it's easier to say OK I'm going to do this quickly, right but in the long run it does make sense to say spend that time and say I'm not going to do this for you but I'll teach you.
>> and what does it look like for you to teach them, like physically?
>> I mean it's sometimes very messy.  Right?  Because you're having to -- you don't want to go too far and too deep down into the rabbit hole you at least want to give them that they should be able to reproduce it the next time they come across the problem.
>> and are you sitting at their desk or are they sitting at your desk or how do you do that?
>> It's just sitting down face to face, generally.
>> Yeah, for those of you who, you know, like I said, have programs, I'm curious to know, with like this WordPress model, does anybody have a hands-on training together type of thing?  Does that work?
>> We did that at the Post; it did not work.  You have to have interest from people.  I mean if they're not into it, then like you're talking at a wall and they're going to get out of the room and they're going to ask you the same question over and over again because they never really take the time to learn it.  We did tons of training at the Post, the Post is a massive program and they have tons of people who did training for all sorts of stuff, they tried brown bags, they tried paying for it, they tried bringing in outside people, you did the same training for us like ten times.
>> I did training.
>>
[laughter]
>> Yes, I was there for that.  And like it just never like, some people they're real interested.
>> Voluntold problem.
>> Yeah,  so I absolutely asked.  So Wilson Anders used to work at the Post and I was up at the New York Times.  I said how did you get your entire graphic staff to be doing coding and all this amazing stuff and he goes, well, that's just expected so when we were building Vox, we told every person during the interview you're going to come here and you're going to code and you're going to be doing graphs and we have screwed it up 100 times, but we're going to get it better.  But it's constantly, working at that.
>> I can share another sort of story that I think is helpful to this.  So at API, one of the things that we're working on now is we have this program where we help publishers develop more data-driven content strategies.  We give them new metrics tools, we do some sort of consulting with them and then they come up with a new strategy for like here's what we're going to cover and how and here's how we're going to measure it.  When they get there, so for one example one of these companies decided they needed to cover outdoors stuff.  They were up in the Pacific northwest with these beautiful outdoor scenes and they didn't have anybody who covered the outdoors.  They.  So they also one is we need to cover outdoors, two is look around our newsroom, we don't have hunters and Fishers in our newsroom, like, we have 25-year-olds out of J school.  So now we need to work with our community and get contributors and we need to use social media to like recruit post outdoors photos and so they came to us can you please teach us how to use social media to work with our community and we were like sure, we can do that, but that was totally different if we'd gone to them and said hey, would you like to use social media?  So the lesson, I think is when they identify the problem themselves, they will then come to you and seek the training for it, versus if you just say hey, I would love to train you on how to do this and they were like oh, no, I don't need to know that.
>> I can back that up also from educational theory, like people learn things when this matters to them.  When it's in a real context.  So getting people together for a training when it's an abstract thing, that's when you have to do it ten times, whereas sitting down with somebody who's like I have this thing.  You might have to do it again with them, but they have a lot more invested.
>> and I think that gets at partly what Steph said is it's got to be part of your culture, because if the newsroom expectation isn't that what you're doing in your job is going to be changing, hey, suddenly then we figure out how to reach out to community members.  If the expectation is that the position and the skills required for it are static, then it's no surprise that nobody wants to come into a mass Washington Post newsroom training.  What do they care, their job that is been static for 5 or 10 years.
>> Or 15.
>>
>>
>> Did you want to add something 1234.
>> Yeah, I just that I think to get them all in a room and train them on a specific thing in an hour or two hours is the same problem you have at a conference.  It doesn't stick there, either.  You go to a session for like an hour and it's like you're going to use Ruby because curriculum design is really hard and you have a wide range of people they have a wide range of how they're going to do it.
>> So would we, I would say.
>> I think one key lesson that we've picked up over in the course of our experience is that like definitely we realize that there has to be a need for it and that whatever skills we try to share, there has -- I mean we're not going to be able to fully train someone until there's a real project for them to work on it.  So normally if we see an opportunity where a reporter comes to us and say we've got this dataset, I think it would make a great this kind of chart or this kind of table or whatever it is, we say perfect, like, let's sit together, let's do this together, or if it's quick turn around then we'll build it and say let's just sit down and spend 15 minutes talking about how I built this and you can do it too.  And our skill-sharing has gone from a little bit more of a formal, you know, roll people in with free food and then teaching them actual skills and hoping they would walk away having learned something to now just showing them what's possible and like here's the result of things that we've built together with a reporter and it was like really a 50/50 effort and you can do this, too.  When you have an idea, let's talk about it more seriously and we'll get into the weeds with it.  And I think that's been a lot more effective for us.
>> I think it's helpful if it's kind of bite-sized and it's something you can use right away.  I do training that's not in newsroom or related to news, but we used to do a really intense two days that taught them many different things, and then they would immediately start practicing.  It was just like too much to like kind of sit in, so we've split it into kind of natural blocks and is what we're going to try now and do one one week and then later on we'll do like the next session.
>> and do they start practicing?  Like do you see that happen.
>> We do, but it's not in a newsroom.  At HUD, it's kind of necessary for them to use it right away.
>> We do training like that, it's two days and it's awesome.  WordPress VIP training.
>> I think it would be helpful in a lot of cases to break it into a little bit that they can go use in the real world and then come back and build on that.  Like do this little bit and use it in the world.  It's always a problem when you stuff too much in a person's brain too fast.  You get excited, you want to teach them so many things and they may even be excited when they're in it, OK, I'm learning, but until they go and do it.
>> My only experience in training is J school, in teaching other students how to code and I think -- I haven't thought about or I thought about -- I haven't figured out how to do this in a newsroom, but the most successful thing I did was at the night lab, we had what we called open lab hours and they were from like 6 to 9 or 7 to 10 or something, on a random week night, which works in college because you're always at the same place.
>>
[laughter]
>> But that doesn't work in a newsroom, but the thing that worked about that was that we have a physical space, and this is where you come to learn and work or your own project that may not be your day job, may not be your homework or whatever.  But having a place where you are forced to get into that mind set is really important.  People walk in, OK I'm here to learn for these three hours.  And I think that runs counter to what we were saying.  If you have a sort of collaborative space, I think -- I don't know --
>> Where you can get more like one-on-one time, as well.  Yeah, the evolution of ours, as Jaeah was saying, has really like dramatically changed over time where we as I said started with the get people in a room, you know, everybody follow along, hope the demo gods don't like strike us down.  And it was not that effective, but I think for whatever reason, people still were like excited.  And one thing that I have found to be really kind of like sneakily helpful for us is that we will actually take a byline oftentimes on pieces that we are really significantly helping out on the production and that, would because then they feel like A, they have both like a right and also like are accountable to giving you their time, because if you guys are sharing a by line, now, it's OK, oh, this is a model that they're familiar with.  OK, we are coproducers on this thing, you need me to communicate with you, I need you to know that you know about X, Y, Z, you know?  Because a lot of times things fall apart because we've spent all this time working with a reporter and we don't hear from them in a couple days and we're like, wait, what happened and they're like, oh, yeah, that got pulled and we weren't in that work flow.  That's maybe not something that is going to be appropriate for what you chieve in your company, but in our case for people who are like hybrid journalists, taking abyline was A, not a problem at all, they're like oh, yeah, that makes total sense and B is this makes it journalism.  You know, the way that you learn things from your sources and learn things from your research, is you've got to learn about how to make this stuff, too.
>> We've also started saying no to data handoffs, like if a reporter or anybody comes and pitches us a story and an interactive or a graphic component that should go into it, we'll totally agree.  We used to say yes and take their data and do what we could with it.  Nowadays we're like yes, and you're coming too for the whole ride and it's going to be awesome.  You know, and just like you know, we try to make it fun for them and not to try and make this like teacher-student thing.  We try to make it as collaborative as possible so that they feel like they have an equal stake and that our work and the kinds of skills that we're exercising to make these stories possible is no mystery to them.
>> I just want to put in another --
>> Oh, sorry, it's Tyler, because hand, was like, OK...
>> Because if you think about how you learned programming, most of us learned programming, it was probably parried, right?  And just pulling them along for the whole story, I think is so important.  The handoff is destructive in a lot of ways.  I think there's a work flow that I can envision for a lot of newsrooms that allows you to form sort of ad hoc teams.
>> Because we now one of the best things about paired programming is having people make mistakes and allowing them to watch you make mistakes that they have confessed that they would have felt dumb if they had made them on their own and seeing us make them is like oh, basically what we're teaching them is how to Google through their problems.  No, really a Google query can be, why is my column doing this thing and no the that thing.  You know, literally feeding it questions, that has been kind of a game-changer for us.
>> I like that you use the word "ride," because I like to use the metaphor of a police ride-along.
>> They aren't necessarily curious about the exact process or they would be the technical methods, but they are curious about the data that they have and they would get excited in seeing the way that you're starting to unlock them for them and it gives you a space to ask questions that they had but they've never really had a situation where they felt OK asking them.
>> and we have people who come to us that kind of like dump things in our laps or are a little demanding and I think, Noah can speak to this, as well, I think people are starting to pick up on the idea that we give more love to people who who are participating.
>> Yeah, totally.
>> One thing that we do in our team is that we try really hard to empower people to feel like they can train other people, so especially when new people are joining our team, we pair them up as buddies, and one of the buzzwords or words that we use a lot in our team is document it.  Meaning like if you've learned something, go into our documentation and document it yourself, because in writing it, it will solidify for you, and then also, now when someone else asked that question, you can can then point them to it and the other thing that we do is when our teams get together for meetups, we do these flash talks and people are allowed to give talks on topics that they're not expert in.  Meaning you will earn it to give a talk, so you're not an expert but you are share it and then that forces you to learn because as you know when you go up and make a presentation you have to prepare.  So it forces people to look stuff up.
>> That's a great point.  Also from educational theory, just reminded me something you said, there's like the concept of like learn it, teach it, do it, that's like the three steps to really learn something, and just, you know, I like bringing that learn something for the purpose of teaching it to others.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> I'm curious about your team's kind of progression from what you said were like brown bag lunches to this kind of more free-flowing integrative process.  What were kind of those check points or like goals or accomplishments that made you decide like the decision points that kind of changed your approach.
>> I mean we talk about this all the time.  Like you know, it's been really helpful I think for us to just have somebody else who's as invested in making this happen so that we can just say what was energy like?  Were people checking out?  Have you seen anybody like actually work on this stuff after you know, you you did your panel?  So a lot of I would say like daily tweaking and reconfiguring and thinking about and observing.  A lot of it has just been observing.  Like Jaeah said we kind of got company buy-in and we've been talking about top-down culture problems.  We did not have that problem.  When I was hired at Mother Jones, like it was very clear to me that this is going to be part of my mission.
>> So I already had that, and you know, our EICs like we have two editors in chief, they're totally awesome, they've done a really good job in these points of contact type places, like morning news meetings and so on and saying maybe you could cataract with Tasneem and she could talk to you, like maybe you guys to work on a map for that.  They've subtlely dropped this stuff in and I know what they're doing.  So in the beginning, you know, I didn't know people that well.  Like I just started and so the brown bag just felt like OK, I don't have relationships here, I need to get these people in a room, like here's how I'm going to do this but really now we know what is far more effective is kind of like what you said, we show love to the people who are jazzed about this stuff and willing to go out on a limb and try something and it's been the relationships.  You know, we're not tiny, I mean so our company altogether is like 75 people or something like that.  100.  OK, so 100 people.  Our editorial team is about half of that, and we've got two bureau, that's the other thing here we've got a bureau in San Francisco and a bureau in DC and figuring out how to, like first we were trying like webinars, you know, scaping them in, when we would do the in-person session in San Francisco.  Forget it, like what we do now is the company sends us both out for like a week or two weeks a year, at different times, especially when somebody new has come on, and then we actually don't even have a program anymore, first we used to have a very formal program and 12 to 1 every day it's going to be brown bag.  We don't even do that anymore.  I kind of don't have a desk when I go.  I'm just floating from you know, desk to desk being and being annoying and just sitting there like hey, what are you, working on.  This is all about getting a little bit of face time with each person because it's incredible the amount you can impart in just like a 15-minute conversation in he recalls it of OK, here's how this spreadsheet works, by the way, did you know you could use table top and on and on and on.
>> I think in my mind the process sort of went like this, it started with us evangelizing and just saying, you know, this is awesome, you guys should do this and showcasing a few examples, like early examples where we had succeeded and you know, including an awesome chart that just like blew up trafficwise and showing those possibility, and trying to just tell people, you know, and convince them, not always successfully, that this was going to work and that they should do it too.  And from then on, honestly from us I think it took very little convincing, we just kind of had to show one piece with a few charts and graphics in it up and people were like, whoa, I want to do that also and so then it became this huge flood of ideas.  I mean we were getting bombarded nonstop and the problem at that point was that people still wanted to just hand off their data to us, and just say, like, cool, like, I want to do that, can you help me, here's my data.  And we had to kind of start out, in the interest of time and deadlines, just doing it, producing it and sometimes it would fail and I think through a lot of failed projects, the projects that often failed were also the ones where the reporter was not as invested in the aspect that we were contributing, and so we kind of realized that we really have to like pull them even further into our process and just like force ourselves into theirs, and you know luckily we're likeable people and they didn't mind that too much, but there was a little bit of resistance at first, and you know, it's not perfect today, but you know, like Tasneem said, we do talk about it almost on an hourly basis, like she's like, oh, God, they're doing this again, and it's like let's not be frustrated, let's figure out a way like what in our process could solve this?
>> How much do you think about training people on just how to get it done like here's the tool to build your chart our your visualization versus teaching them the underlying technology?  Like do I need you to understand how the programming library works?  Do I need you to understand where the data comes from and what format it's in or do I really just need you to know, these are the buttons, this is how you export it.
>>
>> I'd love to hear, that's kind of a philosophy question that we do talk about a lot.  Anybody want to get in on that?
>> I'm much more on like the teach technology, not the button side, but it's not like its actually any better.  I think as I get better at my job, I get worse at teaching other people.  So like two years ago some problem that I might have solved in excel I've forgotten, it's no longer how I would approach it.  And so if I'm -- if its like a fusion tables map I'm also relearning what those buttons do so I end up talking more about the underlying stuff.  I don't know if it's actually argute reason or it's a terrible reason.
>> When I used to work in a newsroom and I was like training people how to use like movable type that's how long ago this was.  And I would teach them to drop in links and stuff, and this is really scary, people were like really terrified of it, and I would actually take like ten minutes and walk them through like explaining what HTML is, this is what CSS is, it makes it less scary.  It doesn't mean they learn it, it just gives them some context of now they understand what this works when you look this stuff up.  Now you know how to look at it.
>> I think it's super, super crucial.  It's not even that you even need to write a line of Javascript.  That's not what I'm showing you all I'm showing you is how my code is talking to the data on your spreadsheet and what that looks like on the page.  And just that shows them the possibilities.  That's actually much more -- I would say if there are two things we're trying to teach at the same time -- and we do rely on like gooey type things.  There's a chart building tool called data wrapper.  I'm sure some of you are familiar with it.  We've done a custom install at MoJo.  We've got that it's one that makes it easy to teach both data principles and like data visualization production at the same time, so I would say for me, it's maybe that I'm trying to teach principles of computational journalism and data visualization and just what is a chart, you know, why line graph and not bar graph, that kind of thing, more so than I would say the technology.
>> Because it's possible to make a really bad chart, a really misleading chart.
>> Yes, that said we have created a series of tutorials, where we can, especially for something like how to make a bar chart in Illustrator, that was a need that came up so often that we couldn't possibly be the ones making it every single time.  So we started out with a tutorial that was very thorough, took you like from start to finish but it was almost too complicated and we realized that that wasn't working just like tossing them a link to the tutorial didn't actually work all that well, so these days I'd say it's kind of like, "Here's a thing that will help you get started, get it started, we'll get you through the rest of it," and even that has made a difference of taking some of the work off our table.
>> We've got them doing mapping in a bunch of different ways, you know, a couple of them, I think are trained on TileMill, the goal is to get more people trained on TileMill.  Google spreadsheets out the wazoo, Illustrator, so there's this suite of tools that we have made kind of the onboarding process, but now we think in terms of drafts more so we say OK, I know you've done a chart in data wrapper before, go and send me a first draft.  Go and get to where you get stuck and then hit me up on Skype, you know, or send me your finished thing and then we're going to sit and I'm going to tell you how to make this chart more effective, but you're going to do the actual hands-on work.
>> You see those people progress over time?
>> Yes.  Totally.  

>> So that eventually they can get to step 3 and --
>> And sometimes we're like, "Wait, when did Tom work on that?"  We just see it on the website.  It's like awesome.
>> One thing that's awesome about that, too, is when you start to use tools and you start to talk to people about it, you also improve the tools.  A huge part of training is you just have bad stuff, like having to teach somebody in HREF versus having somebody click on an URL.  But if you never actually go and talk to the people, you never hear those pain points and you can't empathize, because a lot of time it's my bad for creating crappy software.  It's totally my fault that you don't understand this, and it's my bad.
>> That's a great point.
>> How much do you all have to worry about creating a house style for doing things so that you -- one person's not teaching one a different solution to the same problem and then oh, but she said I should do it this way, right?
>> Yeah, documentation for sure, like I mean you've given more thought to this, I would say.
>> Yeah, I mean we have -- so with charts for example, that's like probably the simplest example that we have, we started out just -- I mean if you look at our earlier work, it's all over the map.  There is no consistent style.  I think even the fonts, I don't know, I mean it was crazy times.  But over time we realized OK, this is not working, let's just spend a day or two figuring out how to make style more consistent and for us our style guide kind of started with the print magazine and we talked with the art team about OK, what's our presence on the web.  We kind of zoomed out a little bit and had a bigger discussion and from there worked with the art team to create a template for charts,.
>> It's an Illustrator file.
>> It's just an Illustrator file, yeah.  So we've kind of been replicating that model as we go on with Datawrapper we'll be customizing it so it's adherent to a Mother Jones style, and I think just -- you know...
>> So visual style is one thing.
>> Oh, I see.
>> What about sort of process?  Right?
>> Yeah,.
[laughter]
>> Good question.  How do you handle that problem?
[laughter]
>> I don't have that problem.  I don't work at a journalism organization, but --
>> It's I don't know, I would say we're constantly just improving it, and reworking and kind of sometimes we have to go back to the drawing board and -- I don't know, it's also, I think, depending on the project and need, the process has to change along with it, so there's never one process that will be applicable to every single project.  But that said, --
>> We often think in terms of if there are two goals for this collaboration with a reporter and this is -- like literally we'll say, like, all right, we can -- it's that whole you can either have it cheap, fast, or successful or something like that, right it's that whole thing.  You can either get them to you know, follow good data principles on this project, like really focus on that, and we can have it be something that's done in two hours, or we can use this as an opportunity to like really show them ways to like modify the code so that they could use it more.  We're just like, what are the two things that we can achieve here and a lot of what we do is just letting some stuff go.  Getting rid of this idea of like perfect and we definitely have put out crappy charts, like we definitely have, but like less and less and less over time.
>> Well, I think one thing you've always stressed is iteration, and just like we're going to let some things go and it's going to hurt, but let's just comfort ourselves by knowing that next time we do this, we know what the pain points were, and that's where we start.
>> Have you thought about tracking where people are at with their knowledge and making logical pathways to build?
>> Not really, I would say not really, again, because so much of this is like -- I mean we have a bit of like the CEO hit by the bus problem here.  Like so much of this is just in our heads and when we're on vacation and stuff, like sometimes things don't, like, get done in good ways or they just don't happen as much as we would have liked, to see in that time, so no, not really.  I think that that maybe is a next step for us, is like -- but then we kind of also are resisting reformalizing, you know?  So I don't know, it's like a tradeoff.
>> So documentation, I'm wondering, we have been trying to document our own training things and how things should be done, but we're using GitHub, which no one can navigate.  It's what a lot of people use.
>> We use WordPress and everyone edits it and contributes it and in our what you call the field guide you can see the faces of who's touched the document.
>> Are you using it pages or --
>> Yeah, just pages.
>> This is a problem we've had.  Like you know, so we've got a GitHub, it's GitHub.com/motherjones.  We have a choose your own adventure plug-in, I think it's GitHub.com/motherjones/CYOA and we are always asking the reporters, like what was your pain point, blah blah blah, but then we have to be the ones to sit down and actually do it.
>> Yeah, but then they won't do it.  It has to be a living document where everyone has access to it.  And then a reporter figures it out and you're like go document it and then their face shows up and they own the change.
>> I don't know, yeah, that's definitely a problem we're having too.
>> I was going to try etherpad,.
>> Wait, so what WordPress tool are you using.
>> We use WordPress, it's a theme.  Yeah.
>> Where everyone is an editor, so just go in and edit.
>> If you really wanted to, you can follow it so any time there's an edit, you can get an email.  But there's 300 people in there, so you don't want that.
>> There's revision history with that, as well, so you can actually go back if somebody decides to like nuke it or breaks.
>> I do want to get back to this question of like the top-down culture problem, because I think that that is so key.  And you know like Yuri, I know you've dealt with this.  For those of you who felt where the obstacle is you this is a grassroots organization, you had this mandate, did it work, did it not work?  What worked?
[laughter]
>> I can tell you a lot of things that did not work.  You know, they put me in charge and I still couldn't push stuff through.  For me, fighting up is a lot easier than fighting down.  Because if it's not a shared mission, then it's hard.  The things that really worked for me was one-on-one, and then you do that with like 10 people and you get like an evangelist and then they go and say check out this cool thing I did.  When you get an evangelist, then it gets better, because then you have more and more evangelists and more and more people get excited.  But there's still going to be one desk that you can't break in.  I'll buy you lunch, I'll take you out for drinks.  What do you want?  You want a computer, here?  You don't like it because it's a Mac?  I mean, come on.
[laughter]
>> There's a corollary to evangelism which is sort of competition or jealousy in some certain newsroom environments.  Like one reporter does some awesome thing with his story and the other reporter starts saying, how come I didn't do that?  Why does he get to do that?
>> We present a friendly face but we are pretty devious behind scenes and we are on this.  We get like a target.  OK, Dave is our next target.  We call it annexation, we have a list of people we have annexed, and it is a bit like Risk.
>> Do you keep score?
>> We should.  I don't want to say easy get, but easy get for us has been our fellows, our interns, who are probably the most eager to pick up new skills.  They're usually -- not always, but oftentimes -- coming from a journalism program, and just hungry, hungry for more.  And so we try to start there, and the same sort of arc happened with the fellows, which is that we started with formal training except none of them had laptops.  We tried walking through through sitting at their desks and training them that way, but even then we realized that a project by project training method was probably the most effective and starting there and in our experience they've been quick learners, so it usually just takes one project for them to now know how to make a chart, now know how to build a map, so the next time someone else comes to us and we don't have the bandwidth, we'll say let us pair you up with this person who has done it before and then you guys go along and have some fun and come to us when you get stuck.  But also trying to just, yeah, I guess.
>> Annex.
>> Yeah, and just spread our skills as far as wide as possible, and kind of starting with the interns was kind of a smart move.
>> Show what about this checklist idea?  Is this something people want to do?  Maybe raise your hand if you think something like that would be useful for you?  Maybe we can talk after.
>> I think it's a really good point when bringing new people in, if you can get them on board with the mission.  I'm really lucky I work for a company where it's insanely how easy it is with people who I don't know how to get beyond that except for everybody come and work at Vox.
>> Do you have enough money for that?
>> But I mean like --
[laughter]
>> My executive editor has more commits at GitHub than I do, and it's crazy.  We get them to commit documentation.  Don't complain, contribute.  If you see a spelling error in documentation in code, you should have access to fix that and we want everybody to be part of this because we're all in it together, and if it tool doesn't work or a system is broken, that hurts us all.
>> That's kind of the byline philosophy for us, because they know that both of our names are going to be on the finished post here and that kind of breeds more of a sense of accountability for getting it right.
>> We give a byline to everyone that touches the story.  We want everyone to get credit for their work and anything that's really, really great should have multiple bylines.
>> And kind of to Yuri's point a bit, how to approach it if your current culture isn't going to value it, like if you're in a position or the person who's asking you to, you know, emphasize training is in that position, some of it just starts with hiring.  Like we just straight-up won't hire someone who's not interested in contributing in that.  Like we work with people on a contract basis first and if they find stuff that's broken, they don't fix it, it's a nonstarter.  And if you have an existing culture that isn't that way, like the best way to -- like one way to activate it, too is to change it for the new people you're bringing in, right?  That's a pretty easy way to bring in more evangelists without having to fight existing culture.
>> Do you find that in those cases you do need the top-level buy-in from like the executive editor level.
>> I work at WordPress.com, not a newsroom, the top-level buy-in for us doesn't necessarily apply because there's not that many levels and it's an organizationally expected.
>> Right.
>> I do think buy-in is one thing, but there's this bigger question of what are the rewards for doing this, so one is I get to do a cool story, that's rewarding but there's other systems of rewards like is this important in my annual review, like am I measured based on do I know how to do this and do I use this skill.  I think those are structures that help, too.  People aren't going to learn something because oh, somebody said I have to, but the sense that the organization values this in many ways, not just they tell me I should do it is pretty important.
>> Right, like that's what's important about it, because it feeds things back into each other.
>> No, it kind of reminds know me, you know, you were asking that question about pathway and I wonder if there's sort of a way that we can work with our, you know, EICs to -- and maybe it's not a formally like broadcasted thing, but just, you know, to have sort of a sense of like what are the rewards for -- what are like the organizational feedback loops and rewards for the people who will like take that extra step to work with us on this, and then take the extra step to go do it at their desk by themselves and call us.  Like, how are we rewarded that as a culture, not just that we're encouraging, but how are we recognizing and crediting and surfacing when it happens, because it's also demystifying for reporters to hear, it's like the competition thing you said, it's like also just oh, he can do it, I can do it, that kind of thing, so what are the points of contact at which you can do that kind of work.
>> Our organization does have learning goals as part of our annual review, and then we reset learning goals each er year.
>> Do people take them seriously?
>>
>> I don't think so.
>>
[laughter]
>>
>> I mean one of the ways was almost, not only are we kind of trying to seeds our skills at all levels, but also just, you know, buddying up with story editors who we know like if we get them to buy into it, then they like they'll almost just convince or just tell the reporter, this needs a chart component, you need to talk to these guys and the story is not complete until that's done.  And you know, I think that's -- it's been a mixed bag, but we, you know, we have -- there's one senior editor in particular who was already very data-savvy and that was just like how he thought oftentimes, so that was a natural starting point for you, just working together with him, and then from then on out, I mean even Mike mechanic, who we never thought we would convince, and he's been very much on board, really.
>> It helped us, you know, talking about sort of what is the carrot and what's the stick kind of thing, it helped us tremendously that this editor Dave Gilson one of our colleagues who's totally awesome, had done this chart package thing about income inequality.  It was our biggest item to date at like that moment.  In terms of traffic and shares.  And the fact that that had just happened, like one thing we always talk about is like you got to get things like fresh -- like reporters have short memories, editors have short memories, it's kind of like that what have you done for me lately, like the charts thing blew up and I could still kind of ride that enthusiasm even though it was like a few weeks out, and say yeah, remember Dave's awesome charts thing?  Like what else could we do.  And our main point of contact is this morning meaning.  That everybody is dialing into it the editors over there, but everybody in SF is sitting in editorially and there are so much rich opportunities to just drop in something oh, yeah I'm seeing that post yesterday about immigrant detention centers is doing really well, man, I wish we could have done a map on that, and then just move on and nobody's getting singled out.  Man, that's a great story, awesome, wish you could have also gotten a map in there.  You know?  It's almost 1:30.
>> OK.  Any final like burning questions?  Yeah?
>>
>> I hear a lot about devs teaching editors, but not a lot of about editors teaching devs.
>> Now we need another half hour.  That's such a good question.  Any of you guys want to jump in on that?
>> In our training sessions it's pretty much the whole west side of the office, which is devs and reporters, and it's pretty much an open topic for everyone, and so as developers, we get talks from about like how to dress for the camera.
>>
[laughter]
>>
>> Yeah, I think going back to just the whole collaboration model, I think as much as reporters and editors are learning from -- I mean we were for a long time working with one of our developers on the tech team half time, and eventually he was -- we were just having him pair up directly with the reporter.  Rather than one of us being in there, and sort of liaising, and I think he learned as much about the editorial process and how reporters think, how editors think, as much as they did about you know, how he goes about his coding, and how his code is structured and you know, all those things.  So I think it was very helpful, because as much as, you know, or nontechnical editorial folks might look at programmers in this very mystified light, the same happens on the other end and we found that you know with one of our developers, he was maybe resistant, I don't recall if he was resistant at first working direct think, he wanted this in between, us as a middle man to kind of translate, almost, you know, what they're asking for and how that transitions to exactly what he should build and how, and I think, you know, that -- so it definitely goes both ways, the sort of, you know, -- it's almost like a cultural exchange program.
>> Part of -- so we've been talking about how we're not doing the hands-on thing any more, but we are still doing the weekly skills thing and that has become much more like this, it's just there really weren't a lot of places in our company where like people from different departments were ever sitting in a room together and it not being a meeting, you know?  So this is just like, you know, OK, Steve Katz, our publisher is going to do a lunch session on how fundraising at Mother Jones ever works, so if you've ever wondered about that, that's the time to come in and everybody is invited to this and there's food.  I've been really excited to see like our tech team is so into, like they're always there at these sessions, like much more so than some of the edit stuff.  I think the appetite is huge, they're really invested in really understanding editorial work flows, editorial concerns and priorities, so, yeah, like you know, I want to make it clear that we're still doing a weekly teaching, like program, but it's about conversation, and it's about -- it's not about hands on.  And it's been, I think, like a really big way of making our whole company more cohesive.
>> Yeah?
>> I think some of it is about expectations.  Like if you expect your developers to be journalists and to be part of the newsroom, they have to know how to write a story, they have to know ethics and they have to know copy edit.  Programmers can be some of the craziest grammar Nazis, because all they deal with is logic.  This is a wrong rule, you have a dangling modifier in that sentence, do you know know what that means?  And at the Post, the developers at a different tore floor at Gannett/USA Today, they were in a different city and when we started moving people into the newsrooms and we said you're a journalist now, and you have to know how to do these things, I think that changed the mentality.
>> But how did the training flow the other way, though.
>> All right so when you bring them in and you have to teach them.  Just like you do.  These are the expectations, these are the ethics, you don't accept free stuff.  And programmers go to conferences and it's like no, you can't do that anymore, you're in a newsroom.
>> and how do does that onboarding process like work?  Is it like one sheet that you're handing them?  Hey, we're five people, what are he we're going to do our spiel, what does that look like?
>>
>> Almost like any new employee, you go through a series of like ten training sessions, we sent the people to budget meetings, they worked a copy editing shift, they also would choose like headlines and do stuff like that, then they also did libel training, they met with the lawyers taught them how to not do libel.  And just the same thing any new person would get, I mean any new reporter would get the same exact training and it's got to be ongoing.  We're not going to touch that.  That's another whole story.
>> It's kind of a startup, your first week, no matter what your job is, you have a support person and by the end of the week, you know like probably identified four bugs you wanted to fix and like a bunch of...
>> I think we're out of time.  All right, thanks, guys, this has been really helpful.
[break] 
