This is a DRAFT TRANSCRIPT from a live session at SRCCON 2014. This transcript should be considered provisional, and if you were in attendance (or spot an obvious error) we'd love your help fixing it. More information on SRCCON is available at http://srccon.org.

Captioning by the wonderful people of White Coat Captioning, LLC
whitecoatcaptioning.com


SRCCON 2014
Session 29 7-25-14, 1500-1730
Franklin 2
"We can stop fighting the CMS, a round-table discussion"
Session leader(s): Chris Chang and Andrew Nacin
--

ANDREW:  All right.  Welcome to "We Need To Stop Fighting The CMS:  A Round-table Discussion."  Like all of these sessions, my name is Andy Mason.  I'm one of the lead developers for WordPress, which you may know.  So I come with a background from someone who builds software but also has been in the newsroom.
CHRIS:  I'm Chris Chang.  We have our own in-house CMS based off of Django, and so I support users next to me as opposed to millions of years...
ANDREW:  I prefer not to see them -- don't write that down!  We're going to start.  I think we'll start really quickly with some introductions because we kind of -- especially since this is not a huge group, which is good -- just a very quickly who you are, where you work, what do you use in your system, whether it's home-grown, or something else -- Django, or whatever.  And what you do?  In my case, Andy Mason, WordPress, and I build WordPress.  So -- but if you guys -- if we can all just do that all quickly and if you're a developer versus a user I think that will help a little bit.  We're going to start over here?
>> Sure.  I'm Matt Perry, I work at Automatic and I use WordPress and I help a lot of other developers with WordPress, too.
>> I'm Laura, and I work at Vox Media and we use a home-grown platform called Course and I'm a product manager there.
>> I'm Matt, I'm currently an independent.  I don't have a -- I'm non-denominational as far as the content-management systems including WordPress but I don't have a particular favorite.  It might be WordPress.
ANDREW:  To be clear, I don't want this to be a WordPress talk.
>> Neither do I.
ANDREW:  Actually, I warned all the WordPress people here who are here to not use the word, if they can.
>> You broke your own rule.
>> You screwed that up right away.
ANDREW:  Just to get an idea this is about fixing some of the bigger problems that we're going to go through.
>> I'm Ed, and I newly joined the Washington Post, and the Post uses Method as well as other tools that have been built in-house.
>> Django a little bit.
ANDREW:  Python?
>> My name is Kyle.  I'm a designer turned product manager.  I work for a company called American City Business Journals and we use a home-grown CMS called Gizmo.
>> I'm Vijith, sorry.  I work at the New York Times they use Scoop which I guess is their home-grown CMS.  I'm a data viz, and CMS doesn't really matter to me but more of the backend stuff.  It has been WordPress -- big on WordPress.
>> My name is Aaron Jordan I'm a technical architect at Conn/Mass.  I pretty much use a popular CSS based -- of which I'm also a core contributor.  Yeah...
ANDREW:  Next... he's a developer.
>> I also do Node stuff as well.
>> Oh, right, stenographer.  My name is Andrew Spittle, and I work at Automatic and I mostly use a software that helps you press words on the Internet.  I'm not a developer; I lead our customer support stuff so I help kind of the everyday user on stuff.
>> I am AmyJo Brown.  So a few years ago -- so a long story short,  Top Twist Media helped design some of their newsrooms.  So at the time I did work with Media Spin to hound news and -- and news engine.  Out of that, I have a lot of opinions and that's sort of about how a CMS could ideally work, and now that I'm doing a start-up in Pittsburgh.  So we're I think starting up through it.  So I'm just really interested to hear the conversation.
>> I'm Jeremy.  I'm among other things a developer at the New York Times.  We use Scoop as was mentioned which is kind of a home-grown thing.  There is some use of the CMS, and also, I support some suppose home-grown itty-bitty CMSs for various blog-like entities sites that tend to be in rails.
>> I'm David Schaeffer formally of Thunder Dome.  I'm a WordPress guy, developer lightly but mostly on the strategy team and business side.
>> I'm Ben.  I'm at the Washington Post, I guess I'm a developer, ish.  Yeah, and I don't touch art CMSs, but it's a Frank -- Method is really the name, really, but other things.  Anyways.
>> I'm Jake, I'm with the U.S. Open Institute.  I don't know anything other than CMSs.  I'm just a CMS fanboy, I've been a WordPress user for a long time, and I like how we've come full circle and we're producing static files again.
>> My name is Russel, I work at the Pew Research Center.  We use WordPress and I do front end, backend stuff.
>> I'm Daniel, I do WordPress stuff.  That's it.  I want to use a different CMS.
ANDREW:  Dude, I'm with you.
[ Laughter ]
>> I'm sick of WordPress.
>> I'm Trey, I'm at Fox Media where we use Chorus, which is our movie on rails platform and my role is, I lead the product team who works on that and launches the sites and does things.
>> I'm Kevin.  I work for Automatic, which is WordPress -- which uses WordPress, I'm sorry.  And I've worked broadly in customer service.
>> I'm Laura.  I do UX for a home-grown platform in the Conde Nast Building working on other shared tools, potentially and future projects that might potentially have WordPress in them.
>> I'm Casey.  I use a custom Django CMS as a copy editor of Source, which Ryan Pitts built and I have also built a lot of small sites on things like Stacy and Jekyll.  And also I like, and also work for Out Of Its Books as a designer/developer/producer which is a hulking custom CMS.
ANDREW:  Cool.
>> I'm the last one?  I'm Holman and I'm the Chief Development Officer for Search Property and we develop our content management platform called Superlative (phonetic).  It hasn't been released yet and I guess it's going to be soon.  And it's different than WordPress in the sense that it's targeting more, like, news agencies.  Like, we are developing actually with Australian WordPress.  It's a Python-based --
>> I'm David, I'm at Box Hound.  And just recently we did Edittorily, which was not a CMS and our fingers are now -- our fingers and eyeballs are now looking at Corks which transcribed it.
ANDREW:  Cool, so the way that we kind of want this to go is, there are, as you can see, there's this really elegantly-done thing that Chris did up on the left.  A really terrible thing that I did on the right.  The one on the left is questions that were -- that we want to think about.  And we'll get to that in a moment.  The thing on the right though is the exact same list.  Who was here at the Friday session yesterday morning -- or Thursday session?  A number of you.  So next door, New York Times RND folks did this really nice talk basically about this but we want to take it a little step further.  They only had about an hour and a lot of it was defining some of the problems which we also want to do but we actually want to go beyond that and actually come up with some solutions so we're going to see if we can find any missing topics here and also we're going to try and maybe tally other things that have been mentioned in the form of maybe some rants that people can throw out.  Things like we need to stop fighting the CMS first.  We need to yell at it for a little bit.  So maybe one or two sentences.  We can just kind of shout these out or go around for something that kind of really bothers you and needs to be fixed.  It can be kind of one of the things that's already on here.  We'll group as we go.  Hopefully his handwriting is better than mine.  So if anyone wants to start or I could -- anyone?
>> A failure to lead us away from, sort of print traditions and creating our own traditions for the web.
ANDREW:  Failure to lead us away.
>> Print-centric.
ANDREW:  Print-centric, that is a new one.
>> That works.  I'm for that.
ANDREW:  What else?
>> Previewing.  Previewing content before it's published.  Previewing changes before they get shared.  Previews around in an easy way.
ANDREW:  Okay.  So that also gets into collaboration a little bit, as well.  I can also add another piece of that would be WYSIWYG.  And sometimes actually the preview experience isn't the best experience for writing actually, either.
>> What does "preview" mean?  So is that really the desktop, the phone, the tablet?
>> Yes.
>> Your big screen?
ANDREW:  All of those.
>> Google Glass?
>> Google Glass?  Watch?
>> Responsiveness?
ANDREW:  Responsiveness?
>> So having responsive content and being able to target based on.
ANDREW:  And beyond responsive is content.  We have these monolithic systems that produce monolithic product.  It makes it hard to have things that are adaptive.  This is similar to the design thing that's up there and similar to print-centric but the interface that you interact with is database riven.  It looks the way the data is structured on the storage level rather than, necessarily how you would intuitively --
ANDREW:  So a lot of this may be the interface being too cadgy?  "Cadgyness" might be a word to --
>> But where the data needs to go on the storage level?
>> The UX?
>> Yeah, the UX in general.
ANDREW:  Well, obviously UX is a whole another ball game, too.  Anybody else have user complaints for CMSs?  I'll be honest, does anybody like their CMS?  Anyone?
>> Sometimes.
>> A little biased, though.
>> All those WordPress people raising their hand, and mine not going up.
>> It depends on what you mean by, "Liking your CMS" because I think there's this false equivalence of enjoying looking at the screen and typing in it, or interfacing with it, or using it and enjoying what it empowers about your work.  So I think it's tricky when you start -- when you conflate those two things, and I think that's one of the things that gets confusing about -- about how to figure out how you solve these CMS problems.
>> I mean, I think --
>> I mean, is it empowering, the creative process, or is it empowering the storage process?
>> I think that's a fair distinction.
>> And if you like it, it's relative to what you know before.  Obviously what we have now is a lot better than what we've previously worked with.
>> Has anybody worked with CQ5?  I've heard people say they're fine with that.
>> I think if we were going to come up with a metric to measure how much we like our CMS, which I don't like it a lot, if I need to accomplish whatever task, what amount of time it takes -- the average amount of time.  And it's too long.  And it's not about -- there's a lot of reasons it's too long and a lot of them are up on that list, but it's about, especially in journalism, shipping, and shipping quickly and we can't do that because conflation of 20 different factors.
>> And I mean, "liking it" is many different things.  You might like writing in it or developing on top of it, but you might hate developing it in general.
ANDREW:  Well this brings up a really good point in general.  These aren't really much problems as much as what CMS needs to do.  Ironically, those two are the same but we've been talking about roles, writing, developing.  A lot of this -- I mean there was something that was written here yesterday on user privileges which doesn't really get at it.  Really, Yuri was explaining this to me earlier today but it was more about role or use contexts.  Not even use -- if you're a writer versus if you're a copy editor, versus maybe an assignment editor, or a developer, or an art director, or maybe a photographer, or that side of a designer.  There's so many ways to interact with it.  For the most part, CMSs only pick one.  I mean, a lot of them will focus on maybe the developer-specific aspects of it, on the ease of maybe getting things together.  Others will focus more on the user-centric aspects, the writer-centric aspects and it really opens up a can of worms when it has to be ease of use for five or ten different roles.
>> I was going to say that I feel whenever CMS is built, there's an idea that there is a workflow in newsrooms that goes from the person who produced the work to the copy editor to the other editors and that there always needs to be a place for each of those roles to exist and in the wild that remains to be seen.  So what I think happens with news apps now is that they're outside of that process so there's a lot of content that's in news apps that's not going into that process because it's not inside the CMS.
ANDREW:  So why isn't it inside the CMS?  And you were getting at this as well.  It's too painful to do.  You have this issue where it's like, "Oh, well, do I have to either the this content here, and design a custom template."  It's easier to spin up a separate thing because it's not monolithic.  And then this came up yesterday -- then the content needs to be edited, and how does that work?  Well, it's in this flat HTML file here.  And a lot of the one-off that happened and the usability issues around that.
>> I mean, solutions exist for that.  We have great version control in sort of the development world.  And you know, it will work for prose, and especially with things becoming more integrated and editorial projects, maybe we're moving towards a world where things are --
>> Does it get work for copy editors, though?
ANDREW:  It tracks their changes well.  But again this is about the roles -- is that the best experience for writers?
>> Not currently.  But I think the protocol could work.  You could build something around git that would work.
>> But does the model work?  Does the writer brain -- the copy editor brain function in the way that the git model actually functions for that?
ANDREW:  And can you build around the repository as if they were working with another system?
>> I mean, most new platforms for writing that are coming out, things like drafts have versioning built in.
>> Yeah, but it's not the same with what works in newsrooms.  There's a lot more notification and assignments because again, with the speed at which we're working at there has to be that cue that you can see that it's your turn to edit:  You're in, you're out.  I think of news editing, which I think as far as that role is based is the most elegant way that I've seen that work but with draft, it still feels clunky to me in terms of knowing whose turn it is and there's a hierarchy.
>> And the editing process is less about, "I'm going to remove this sentence, pull it in, here's the diff."  It's conversation about is this the right angle to take?  What does this convey and the back and forth that needs to happen before the actual change in the body text.
>> And in news edit you can kind of insert that within the body and you can see in the comments and the strikethroughs.  I mean, there's a sort of a way that you can have that conversation within the tool but I hadn't seen that with drafts any other option.
>> Well, even within an organization, there are all these different ways that people work.  I mean the work that -- the beginning-to-end workflow exists in some places where there really is a finite endpoint that goes out, and that's the article of record for the moment and other times it's like, well you should go back and reopen that file instead of publishing that one, and go back and change things -- have to maintain things.  And there are often things that are really lightweight that maybe the bloggers go straight to publishing but maybe other things that are considered more organizational.  So even the concept of a workflow is tricky because it's different all over.
ANDREW:  Question:  Does everybody kind of avoid asset management, entirely?
>> What do you mean by that?
ANDREW:  Like, does everyone kind of assume that asset management will always be terrible at a management level?
>> What do you mean?  Define the term.
ANDREW:  Dealing with photos and videos in some kind of structured manner versus "I've just hard coded this and I'm done."  I don't even know if this has been used or referenced.  This was kind of an ongoing problem.  We were talking about Chorus and we were thinking that it was probably one of the weaker pieces of the system.  I would argue one of the weaker pieces of any of the systems out there.
>> Asset management tends to live outside of the CMS entirely that exists on just type of server.  That's what happened with The Seattle Times, the photo server.  Everything was tacked and categorized by date there and we had a whole backup that was a whole roomful of filing cabinets and CDs.
>> But is that ideal?  Because that does simplify the problem that you're handing to the content management system.  If the asset management -- the photos, maybe it makes more sense to divorce those two things?
>> I don't think it makes sense at all.  I'll be honest with you.  It's just another form of content.  We're just deciding that well, we're just going to deal with text because that's easy to get into in database and we can render out in the template.  And I think that's bullshit.  I think that's a hard problem to solve, there's no question.  But I think if you think about how we're putting together stories like, if we're working backwards from you need to -- we need this to tell stories more effectively and we want to take all these pieces and we want them to work together.  I actually think there's an interesting part of this whole conversation, right, that it's about you just use the term "asset management."  And I'll just say that my big beef is that we call this system "content management system" -- it's the worst fucking acronym on earth and I've done this rant many times before and I'm sorry for anybody who's had to hear it but it just sounds like something the IT department came up.  We've got a bunch of content.  We're going to have to manage it.  Let's make a system for it.  But it's not -- it's actually not.  That's clearly us, technology people solving the problem.  It's not like it's the most obvious way to article that we weren't solving problems of the users or the business, right, and I think asset management is.  That's why, I mean, even the fact that we think of calling it "asset management" is part of that, right?  We're not thinking about about the ways that you're able to organize those.  And the fact that we think of those contents as separate from the assets is funny too, right?  And we, for Chorus, I think it really comes back to what problems you're trying to solve.  Because for us, when we built, like, our asset management system, we would just take photos.  For example, early on we were taking photo feeds from sports bloggers.  So we were saying, "Oh, sweet."  We bring in Getty and index it.  And if we were writing about the Astros, we'll show you Astros photos and make it easy to crop it.  But The Birds show up, and they say, "We take all our photos ourselves and we watermark them and we need them searchable," all of a sudden the system we used sucked really hard.  And we didn't stop to redesign but I think we just need to reframe what we're trying to build here -- work backwards and think about it.  I think the first part of this conversation, to me, was fascinating about, like, who likes it and why.  Like, you know?  I think a lot of, like, if you can build on it, you know, it's nice.  Or you're having to build the platform itself or if you're the user of it, you know, who likes it?  I think that really gets to the heart of this conversation.  Like, who are we doing this for for what reason, you know?  And work our way backwards from this and it allows us to get the print shit and allows us to get the stuff if we're working backwards from it.
>> So is there a term that you guys use originally that's not content management system?
>> I think vocabulary is tough but I think we call it "platform."
ANDREW:  We call it "platform."  That's as far as we go.
>> And sometimes not even publishing because sometimes they call it "content story."
>> Well, we don't even say content platform because we do a bunch of communities that's wrapped up, or a strategy that we organize all the content around.  I think if you even start to segment it like that, it starts to get really difficult.  If you're building something from scratch, you know, I think that you don't end up with a content management system in many cases, right?  You end up with it in a different place.  You end up with, like, different sets of tools and that's why it's hard.  It's easy to call it a content management system because everybody knows what they think -- they think they know what that means.
>> I think that Trey's point about moving from the first version that does something for, like, sports editors to having to do something for, like, technology people, like, is also an interesting distinction for me that a lot of these problems are at, like, the organizational level.  It's like they're not designer or interface software problem, it's like organization/design.  Like, this tool is supposed to be used by too many different kinds of people that don't talk to each other and they all want the same tool.  And the other potential approach it makes me think of is something that might be helpful is design patterns around the idea of what people like or, like, what works for people and why.  I think to even, like, version control, like, what works for you and why, it's just an interesting thing to have -- research, or like a catalogue.
>> Yeah, I feel like the whole conversation about people wanting different goals is why everything's so segmented anyways, and the wrangling piece is, how am I going to get my photos for my partner, or for the photo desk or the copy editors, and search in their own world?  And maybe the problem isn't "maybe we need one pool" or it's --
ANDREW:  Well, one of the big things with the wranglers yesterday was the term "monolithic."  That word came up about ten times describing what most platforms are.  At the same time, the issue is that maybe there's this one monolithic thing.  There's this asset management thing over here or whatever people are managing through.
>> That's a job like wrangling all that content from all those disparate areas.
ANDREW:  But part of the proposal is, in many cases, build these individual silos and then tie them together.
>> Yeah, I don't think there's a problem with having separate systems, just ideally there would be one wrapper, one interface.  So like, I'm just thinking about the post.  We might have a great tool where we can embed flat HTML but then you have to go into our other CMS, our main CMS so that SEO works and you have the main promo on the home page.  So it doesn't because everything is siloed.  It means that sometimes you have to go through multiple channels where having, like, a facet doesn't help because the facet only does some subset of the tasks that need to be done.  So if you had one wrapper on one thing, you could still have that quick thing that also happened to access other systems because we can't, especially as a large organization, we can't tear everything down and rebuild it.  That can't happen.  I don't think it can.
>> Sure --
>> -- do you want to do it?
ANDREW:  Anybody else have, like, one-sentence rants?  The longer ones are fine --
>> They were compound sentences.
ANDREW:  -- because we've already covered a lot.  So here's the idea.  The idea is after this we can break up into anywhere from groups in between, like, five and ten.  There's five tables here but it doesn't really matter.  Ideally, focus on one major area that is a problem whether that is talking about maybe more generally, like, how can we redefine what a platform or a CMS actually is?  Or more specifically -- I mean, some of the stuff that we didn't even go near would be archiving, which is very unsexy, but there's a lot of different issues there.  I mean, as an example for archiving we deal with, okay, well some of it is long term static stuff.  Some of it is short term stuff.  Some of it is dynamic news apps but then also maybe you have the issues of news dips and how does archive have to do with archiving changes?  And you get into revisions and then version control and then it spirals from there.  So what we want is to spend, ideally, maybe like 15 minutes on two different parts in groups.  The first part would be the left side which we would essentially be evaluating.  Pick the best implementations out there.  If you're doing purely revisions, it's probably going to be Editorially.  The next step would be, like, what makes them good?  So actually describe them.  So why is Editorially better than any other implementations that you've seen?  Maybe if it's not implementations, you could talk about something else that you've experienced.  The next one is, what's missing?  As something as vision is, what should it be doing that it doesn't do other than "it's not working anymore?"  And then the last piece would be, like, how to actually integrate.  This kind of goes into the perspective of, okay, we had this one implementation, how does it need to interface with other aspects of the system?  Revisions, of course.  I was just getting into how it goes into archiving, and maybe publicly displaying those.  Or this idea that you have to expose those and maybe potentially you might have to merge a few revisions together for public display, almost like rebase, or squashing commits on git, or narrating messages that normally editors would never do or think about.  But maybe a narration to a change is a correction to that whole story.  The second piece of it is recommendations and ideally mixed with what the recommendations could be is actually coming up with, not necessarily a spec, but what the best practices should be in this area for what needs to be built.  Talking about, like, ideally drafting a plan to go forward and starting to come up with, like, specific solutions.  And specifically, like, what can be built in this area, whether that's a WordPress plug-in, or a standalone system, or a prototype, if it doesn't exist yet.  It's like, what can we actually do to make this better?  And also the third one, there is also best use of money and effort.  Where is the time best spent?  Where is the money best spent?  I mean, we can talk easily about something that never even came up at all.  By the way is anything related to user comment?  Comments, discussion, anything like that?  And you guys probably know about the $4 million currently being spent.
>> They got that covered.
ANDREW:  They got that covered.  Problem solved.  But honestly, where is the money?  Where is the time best spent on how to make editing better -- what concrete thing that no one's really done well to make that experience better?  Does that mean like mediums interface for everything or does that mean everything along those lines, as well?  Does everyone feel comfortable with that?  We can pick and randomly assign these and put you in groups but I think it might be better if everyone stands up in a moment and maybe starts talking about forming different groups.  Three people forming to talk about SEO because that's what they want to do, that's fine.  I'm just kidding.  SEO joke.  We don't care.  But beyond that, though, if someone really wants to talk about, like, assets and by that I mean "photo management" then we can get into groups.
>> Can we boil it down from the list?
ANDREW:  That's kind of the idea -- the big ones I would imagine.  A lot of these are similar.  Collaboration is really big if only it gets into revisions and tracking, and comments among users and things like that.  I would tend to think that text editing and more larger, writing, is a big problem.  It certainly seemed like assets is a whole issue, maybe in terms of how it's defined.  Of course we didn't even really talk about workflows.  Editorial workflows which is another big thing.
>> I have a question.  Is anyone actually feeling ambitious enough not to use TinyMCE in their big production WYSIWYG.
>> What do you mean by that?
ANDREW:  I mean, Course uses it, right?
>> Is anyone not using --
>> We're actually underway on not doing that, so -- but I mean, that's a whole interesting conversation about, like --
ANDREW:  That may need to be discussed over drinks later.
>> I know some folks from Guardian here.  It might be fun to shoot the shit with them, those who have embarked beyond the confines of CKEditor and TinyMCE, but it's definitely challenging.
>> The homebrew, it requires markdown and it has not any sort of WYSIWYG.
ANDREW:  And that's not a great experience for writers.  It's great for developers.  What was that?
>> The back turns into asset management and embeds because I think a lot of what comes out of that is content portability and you're using a hard-coded image tag and it's not going to --
>> I think anyone who tackles management is also going to be thinking about how -- so not just like, storing content.
>> Or content portability, we're talking about TinyMCE.  That assumes HTML is the format that we want and, you know, there are many other formats that we --
>> -- HTML for life!
>> DHTML!
ANDREW:  Does anybody feel strongly that they would like to talk with someone more about a topic?  We're going to try and do maybe two rounds of this.  So if you want to spend 20 to 30 minutes on one, and then we can go ahead and talk about an each of those and, ideally, by the end of this time we can sit down and spell out maybe some real big solutions and next steps.  Maybe so, when Knight comes around and they have $4 million, they can maybe fix another problem.  I'm kind of serious too.  We can really start to describe this in different ways.  Does anybody want -- I really want to talk with the people about next -- yeah?
>> We have, for example, ways of divorcing content from presentation, CSS.  And despite the buggy shit that you have to deal with, it's a system that works reasonably well.  I would like to talk with people on divorcing content from structure because then you can have your editorial structure be different from content structure something that makes you not have to worry where the diffs are.
ANDREW:  A lot of this maybe Circa would structure content along those lines.  This is a quote, this is not equal.
>> I think content model is the thing that I'm most interested in.  And I use that term broadly to describe, you know, thinking about -- that's another thing to talk about asset management married to content and thinking about, you know, more modular, you know, kind of chunks and how we mark those up, and how we attach metadata to them.
CHRIS:  Is that the same thing?  You spoke first, I'll give this to you.  And you can form a group around this.
ANDREW:  Anyone, next one?
>> I would follow up on the collaboration and the version control stuff because I'm curious about -- I'm curious about where people's heads are about that range.
ANDREW:  Next one?  Other people interested in that, by the way?  Probably a decent amount of people.  Is that another one?  Next one?
>> I was going to say that I was under the collaboration one.
ANDREW:  Another group?  No one else interested?  Just wanna talk about these two things, which is fine.  Are these too big of problems for us to tear off?
>> Rolling asset management?
ANDREW:  Content models?
>> It doesn't have to.  It was just opinion.
ANDREW:  You wanna talk about assets?
>> I want to start a company around assets, so if anyone else wants to...
>> You're going to be wrong, man.  I'll tell you that now.
ANDREW:  Your branding is off.
>> Asset management is dead!
ANDREW:  So is everyone ultimately interested in these two things?  Because we can literally split the room in half and talk about each of these if you want to.
>> What if you want to be in both conversations?  Do we have to sit in the middle?
ANDREW:  Is anyone not really interested in either of these?  Which is an option.  We can continue as a group but I think smaller groups is better instead of doing one of these after another.  I would rather shrink the room down a little bit.
>> What was the other one besides the --
ANDREW:  Collaboration, version control, and content model.
>> They're complementary.
ANDREW:  And maybe your group depending on who's in there.  Can break it down into smaller groups if it's cool?
>> I think we may need to start with the big things and break it down.
ANDREW:  Sounds good.  This is flexible and we have time.
           [ Group Work ]
           Pick a side!
>> I feel the structure of the room.  You guys should pick a side.
ANDREW:  That corner is collaboration and version control stuff and it looks like the content model is, like, everything else.  So you wanna go down and go over here?  
[ Group Work ]
All right.  Do you guys wanna start?
>> Does it make sense for us to start?
ANDREW:  I think it might because you're talking about overall content and they're talking about breaking it down.  Maybe we can have multiple people talking about it.  I think we're probably going to talk at each other from this point on.  Okay.  Um, yeah, you wanna start?  You're already -- you're already... now you're just making fun of me.
>> Ready?  Summarize.
>> Summarize:  Version control sucks.  If you guys remember, you guys know how much version sucked on a very granular level but we sort of talked a little bit about what works for a specific use case, that's sort of a really important sort of way to think about this.  So we're really talking about the newsroom and about trying to sort of fit with a use case.  That is, how do you end up with really quality content that is really well sourced, really well edited?  So there's a model for -- and ask, let's think with a linear perspective.  You write a draft, they submit to a editor's pool.  Someone reroutes it, sends it to copy edit and says ready to go, and ready for a sophisticated content model and/or decorate with blank tags and publish to the "Internets."  Other folks in the universe are familiar with the content management system -- a version control system called Git but the complexity, the cognitive complexity of Git is maybe a little bit more than these folks need.  And I certainly have seen that in my universe and so keeping it simple best implementation, best practice.  Let's try and keep something simple where you know you don't lose your work.  So your work is resilient that changes are auditable, attributable, and accountable, not just to the people in your organization but even to the public.  So if I discover a problem with my writing or I misspell somebody's name, that error correction can be propagated out to a public-facing article.  But also even thinking farther back in the line if you're basing your work on research or open data that you discover is wrong, that can be propagated through, so you can see those versions changed through time.  Another interesting thing that we suggested was that -- discussed was that there is a version control system where each change attributable exposes interesting data within the organization about expertise.  Who's getting involved with editing articles of different types?  Who are the topic experts?  Why is this workflow better than that workflow?  So attributable changes expose a lot of data that can be really useful.  So, linear, resilient model that's really, really good.  Tracking changes, implementation detail.  I'll put it out there that it seems like an implementation detail.  A lot of it -- a lot of tracking changes can often just as often be well represented as retroactive.  What happened?  When did somebody do this?  So newsrooms appear to be braced on a brigade model.  So it's like, "To the captain."  And the captain says, "To the colonel."  And he says, "This goes out."  So tracking changes, you have so respect the lines of authority.  Note, merging prose sucks.  So, we're not going to deal with a branching model.  Again, the cognitive complexity of branching in Git.  Raise your hands if the first time you used Git you thought it was really easy to understand.  Thank you.
>> Much easier to understand.
>> All right, so, vocabulary's really bad.  Hard-to-explain to a writer -- don't me a favor -- do me a favor just branch, do some work and I'll merge it later.  You can approve the merge.  No, branching sucks we're not going to do it.  Check this out.  Branching, trunk, tree, branch, branch, branch, branch.  Keep it narrow, address each change, let them go one off, and let the writer be able to pick any one of these to this in this universe.  So diffs, good visualization of diffs, that's useful, that tracks changes, reverts, those work.  Interesting things that came up with collaboration.  Where do you store your notes when your editor makes a note on your document?  AmyJo just said that editors leave notes in line.  Guess what, those are protected.  They're not published.  It's not possible for them to be published, they get excised from the document.  And I think that's great.  Editorially has an opinion about where those are stores but making a conversation about this is arguably a big part of it so that you're not walking to someone else saying, "What do you think of this?"  So this is table stakes for version control, I think.  That can be at the commit level if you're working in a inner granular model which I'll talk about in a second.  It can be a milestone, it can be a mock on a diff.  Any place where you can see something about a change, you should be able to say something about a change.  Slugs suck.  When you change your -- what is slug version control?  That's what we're -- I hope you talk about that.  Last thing, I'm not even addressing the core proposition but I think I'm answering all the questions.  We've talked about all the questions.  Collaboration models around working at the same time, three possible options.  So U-Lock which means that if Erin is writing and I approach the document to write and I cannot write and I have to ask his permission, there is branching, we've discussed branching, and there's multi users, simultaneous users -- this gets to the question of the best use of money and effort.  If you are doing operational transformation.  Raise your hand if you've worked on a collaborative text editor how do you feel about operational transformation?  It's a sophisticated thing.  You can use other people's work.  Like, ShareJS is a great example.  I love ShareJS.  It's not a great WYSIWYG editor so you have to make a tradeoff between user and developer in time.  It may not be the best thing to do however.  These things are stacked for a reason.  There are other political and social reasons why locking systems exist.  If a journalist is writing, maybe she doesn't want somebody coming in and writing at the same time.  Because flying cursors kind of suck.  I think technical writers love flying cursors.  People writing manuals love flying cursors.  People writing directions love flying cursors.  But for this purpose if you can get to the point where you're building a simultaneous editing system with operational transforms in the background and you conceal that, and you present it as I'm storing XIFs, or you can store it as branching.  That gives a lot of leeway in terms of how people use your version control system.  I would propose that you keep it simple and you store diffs rather than implementing something super complex and super upfront, storing diffs.
ANDREW:  Store the diffs or store the version and then diff them dynamically?
>> Well, that's a good question, right?  Full disclosure, Editorially with every version that you saved, stored the entire text of your document as it was in that revision, right?  Computer science-friendly, no, right?  It's not sexy but was it easy to build?  Double thumbs up, right?  Was it easy to maintain?  Is it auditable?  Double thumbs up.  I would -- the problem is that I don't think it scales as a storage system.  That's my -- I'm only speaking for myself, right?  That's why this is -- this is the little recoil.
>> Quick question at one point does it stop scaling?
>> What?  At 1.. does it stop scaling?  Is it a point that users going to hit on the regular?
>> It didn't stop scaling for us.
ANDREW:  Sorry.
>> If you are talking about resilient work, how expensive is it to store that many versions?
ANDREW:  But if you're storing only diffs then you can't necessarily do other kinds of comparisons.  You're always comparing the first one preview one to the next one.  You can't compare two sides of the branch.
>> You kind of can, actually.
ANDREW:  You kind of work.  But you have to reconstruct the original.
>> But you do what the Git -- version two is -- version three is that compiled version plus more diffs.
>> How do you do merge resolution, though?
>> You don't, you let people do it.
>> You just provide some interface that do you want this?  Do you want this?
>> You say, here's had the two documents, here's the diffs between them does it makes sense but the fact of the matter is, it's like good news for brains is computers can't do this well.  They cannot do it well when you get into a situation like this and you're comparing two distant revisions that works -- it's kind of like doing an octopus merge or three-way merge in pros is actually really, really complex and what you're trying to engender is trust and resilience, you don't want a computer to do it.  You want a good UI.
>> And the other use case that we talked about we used the example of an academic paper just because it was the most likely to be shipped out to multiple people at once kind of thing before you you might ship out an academic paper to five people and you as a writer might want to take bits and pieces of each.  Sometimes maybe one reviewer or two reviewers had feedback on the same two paragraphs.  You're not wanting to merge anything but synthesize them yourself, originally, and put them into a meaningful -- a meaningful change to you rather than any sort of, like, merge between exact suggestions.
>> I don't think you ever want to collaborate a change.
>> I'm not convince that you'll want to -- I mean that's a -- so when you're looking at this.  When you've got, like, if I've sent something to you to edit.  I would love to be able to see that it's a diff off of my work off of a specific point but maybe it's not.  Maybe it's just interlooped with my work.  Maybe you get back to my in three weeks.  As long as it's attributable to you and I can say where it came from, that might be enough.
>> Well, I also a use case in my job right now, where we have a CMS that doesn't allow for any kind of organized branching and what we end up doing is making, like, literally duplicating the same file three times to experiment with different things in a way that's not tracked and to me, it's like a complete nightmare and the use case that I think it actually has come up here a lot was this idea of, like, an art-directed editorial.  It's what we're trying to do in this case and because there's no branching and because it requires a lot of, like, finicky exploration we -- um, I really miss that.
>> But you want to be able to start your work from a specific point in time, right?  In three different ways?
>> Um, yeah.
ANDREW:  Well they're always there.  The branching of A, B, and C, I tend to agree.  We don't really need to support that.  But the other option though, something that's published and I'm scheduling, let's say or I'm working on a rewrite of it while I'm doing that, I then have to go back and fix a typo in the currently-published work.  That's hypothetically a branch, you're still going to a point in time and making a change.  I mean, maybe you're not really dealing with a separate fork as much as you're going back in time and immediately updating it, and also keeping that in some sort of a rested state and not published at all but there are some use cases that do require some kind of juggling.  Of course, the problem there is that almost immediately unless you're using the command line, the user experience breaks down 'cause it's incredibly difficult to be like, "You can optionally schedule this change for tomorrow at 9:00 a.m."  And you have your announcement or something like that.  And that becomes a real pain in the ass.
>> It's, I think the place where things are breaking, which is great that you're approaching it this way.  Like, we're thinking like developers and branching and merging and resolving conflicts with diffs and something like that.  But at some point you need an editor, you need an editor or a journalist to make decisions about how in the words come together.  So the breaking point seems to be...
>> It's social, right?  These are social problems.  There are technical solutions to social problems but there are also technical solutions for technical people for technical problems and I don't mean to be approaching it the wrong way, but it gets really tricky.
>> Good job, guys!
>> Silence...
>> We can go ahead and ship that, that would be cool.
>> Are we all done?  Sweet.  So we talked about content model.  And we started off by really, just like, kind of thinking through.  We started talking about assets a little bit and really, this whole chunk of things which was just like, some stream of consciousness that led to, I think one really big point.  So we started -- we really started talking about, you know, the role of, like, the format in it.  We started talking about atomic units of content.  We started thinking about, you know, the very influential to the model.  You know, do you have these reusable entities that are, like, equal to each other?  You know, should entities be addressable and easily pulled together?  We talked about some different examples of people who were thinking about content model but I think that the one big kind of revelation that I think is pretty interesting is, when you think about -- when you talk about this stuff in content management systems and we think about sort of the legacy that we've inherited and, um, you know, problems that we were specifically trying to solve and the way that we sort of approached it as we were, like, developers, like, making, you know, forum-based software.  And bringing that to these problems is that we took the issue of, like, the user presentation and the article format, right, like whether it's like this is a story or it's a gallery or it's a video or it's a, you know, a set of updates in a live blog, whatever.  We took the interface for creating those different types of formats and we tightly coupled these two things with the way that we represented that content in the data model, right?  So, you know, the easiest way to think about this is we're like, it's an article, it has a headline and so -- it has a body, it has a byline and there's an author associated with that, et cetera, et cetera.  That's the way that it looks.  That's the thing that we're showing.  So on the backend we're going to give you a tool, you update the let youline, you update the body, you update each of the individual things that we broke down.  And in the database we have a whatever -- entries model that has, you know, a headline column and a body column and an author column and all these things and if we want to have, you know, separate ones, we'll just -- we'll recreate each of these three things separately each time because we have tightly coupled these things together, right?  And the reason that we kind of came to this is because when you started thinking about things -- examples of things that people were doing, let's just say the Circa 1 for example, is that they may have started with, you know, this notion of the format itself, you know, like, these little chunks of information that they would push to you over time.  I don't know if you're familiar with that app.  And the editing is creating each one of those chunks in the system and the data model they probably have, like, each one of these chunks that they're attaching metadata to each one of those things but even if you think about building a gallery each one of these things is tightly coupled and one approach is to change the format completely.  You know, redesign the experience on the front end and that will give you -- the result was that it would give you a more modular, atomic unit of content model and it would give you a tool that would do that as well.  So what we started talking about was if this tight coupling is what's holding us back.  How would you break these things up so that you would give yourself more flexibility in this, right, without compromising user experience of the user presentation is -- without compromising user experience of with editing this.  So just starting with the editing one, like, we have this representation of a document that you're writing, right?  Like the individual fields is difficult that way.  But instead of, like, trying to expose that content model into the editing interface that you just allow people to edit these things and you figure out from that, what kind of the structure is underneath that.  We figured that out.  TinyMCE is actually doing that.  Is HTML the right structure?  And at the end of the day what's funny is, we take that structure and we shove it into the database anyway and we can try to resolve that by not doing HTML by saying, "All right, everybody has to do markdown."  So there's no structure that we're shoving in there but what we're doing is sort of removing the structure problem that we would want to solve so that we would be able to kind of, reorganize these addressable chunks together.  So kind of getting into the practical pieces that we started thinking about, a great experience of putting stories together in atomic units that would give you some flexibility in -- if you broke this out, and how you present it.  But some of the ideas like, don't expose the model so much in the editor, right?  Like they don't need to see that but potentially it's valuable as they're writing this to be able to say, here's what we're understanding the model of this document to be as you're going along.  You can kind of light it up a little bit, right?  Like right now, in TinyMCE, you flip over and see the HTML but for a lot of users that's not a really valuable way of saying this is how we understand the structure of this document, right?  These chunks if you do create chunks, making them easy to find, this gets back to the asset model thing we were talking about taxonomy and things like this.  When you do start creating these chunks and you want symbol things and you want to put them back together it has to be easy to be able to find those things.  You have to organize them somehow, that search.  Is there a taxonomy that you can organize this under?  But that's an important part if you're going to break everything up, then you should make it easy to put it all back together, you know, and in using/attaching metadata to those units.  But you know, the key thing here is that it should be easy to create these things, right?  It shouldn't be extra hard just because we want to have this super sweet atomic content model to have different user presentations shouldn't mean that we, like, break those things up.  And you know, it creates flexibility for these multiple formats and this common, basic UI was just a conversation about, you know, back to that one document thing.  We still have that model and it's still useful for thinking about putting a story together.  You don't have to couple that with what the presentation layer is, or what even, the content model is, if that's still an useful way to create this.  So if we were to practically start to put some things together, these would be the guidelines with the notion that, maybe what we're trying to solve is decoupling these can, but not decoupling in a way that breaks up the user experience -- consuming content but also, like, creating it.
ANDREW:  But creating would take place say in a single editor but it would the --
>> And instead of the model that we have right now, it's like, there's all these, there's these 40 potential elements that we might want to use in the database and here's these 40 boxes be that you can fill in instead making sure I'm creating this thing.  And as I go, I can optionally create the elements that I want, which is kind of an UX thing but it's also --
>> Well, you have that WYSIWYG editor.  But the problem with the WYSIWYG editor is that you have too many options.  Really what you want are the six options and that can be rendered however, whatever you want and then you pre-process it so that it gets broken into it's pretty much like a WYSIWYG editor that breaks down into the elements that we want to use later but doesn't break down into the bold.  Not just a list.  But break it down to this is multimedia that you can use elsewhere.
ANDREW:  I'm curious how it would feel like.  Would it feel like a single white canvas that you would work on but as you hit a new paragraph, as you enter it would kind of show the new blogs.
>> Just real quick, what is an example of this.
ANDREW:  Does it feel like what circa as a presentation in chunks?  They might write that in one file.
>> I think you would expose that as you need it for whatever presentation you're about to put together, but like, we've been you know, David's -- shown up recently at Fox with Mandy and Jason, and they've been -- and reading those interviews are fascinating for this because I just think that, you know, people will -- they just when they're writing and when you're creating, you just don't want to think about that shit.  You just want to get ideas out and you want to mess around, and you want to move them around.  You're just not thinking in the content model because, why?  It's fucking crazy.  And you know, and that's the -- I think, you know, and when you hear people -- when you try to break down and ask people have this praise for media it's just because there's not a lot there and it's not exposing any of that.  It doesn't even give you the option of to start doing any meta data of any --
ANDREW:  It's really easy to control when you only have five elements.
>> But that's even us as product people thinking about it.  One of our writers just uses Medium to write.  Just think about that for a second, the fucking purpose is to write.  You're a writer and you're writing something, and you're taking all this other stuff and they have confidence that it's going to be there, that there's not all this extra stuff that it's not going to be screwed up or whatever, that they can grab this easy text and it's not about trying to solve all these other problems in the interface.
>> And the option if you're going to weave, like, probably debated for a long time is that the options are probably all different but I think kind of the point is to not make the writer think about all the options upfront.
>> Right, 'cause sometimes the reasons why writers hate CMSs is because there's a demand from the organization, you need to write an SEO headline, you need to add a tag, you need to do this, this and this.  That's not what the writer stops but the organization requires it but all the writer wants to do is write to before they're mad at the CMS or the has had at the organization for wanting to be able to fulfill that...
>> We take -- we're like, these are the requirements?  Great, put them all on the screen.  Here are all the requirements.  Here are all the things that you need to do.  And I think it's a workflow thing of "what am I doing right now?"  I'm writing.  And those are real things that we have to do but when do you start to think about those?  One of the things, just by the way -- sorry, that we were talking about that somebody mentioned that was pretty cool if it was doing this type of structure underneath the hood over time is that for version control what would be cool is that the chunks that it's creating some of those chunks you have permissions to be editing them, certain ones over time, or you could be interacting with different pieces, certain pieces could be locked while other ones aren't.  But it's the first thing and I always understand that the first thing that I'm just writing up at the top is the headline.
>> So you want make sure that the social media expert is the one writing the head -- like you attach permissions to...
>> Well, I think that's where the use case that you brought up.  Where something's been published, the writer's ripping it apart for a rewrite of things that need to be changed -- is where it comes into the issue of where this starts to come into play you can have version control at that module level in some way so that the module could have -- of course you wouldn't want to create resistance but something which could push that one existing model out to change that thing.
>> I said earlier, you know, that I was interested in sort of talking about a theoretical specification to decouple the structure from, you know, from the content?  We went off in kind of a different direction, great.  But in terms of an actual decision, I'm trying to bring it back to something tangible.  I think it would be awesome to be able to have something like TinyMCE, a WYSIWYG editor but it goes back to HTML, it spits back sort of structural information about the piece, right?  And you kind of, over -- wildly over-engineer your content and put it on the shelf and don't even worry about it and I just want an editor that the text structure and either publishes or it files above -- sorry, the model as currently implemented doesn't support this article that you're trying to do and then you just have your developers go and extend it a little bit because you can over-engineer things and never use them and you shouldn't have this for this theoretical thing that you're never going to do.  And so if you have a development that needs it.  You can just ping the process.
ANDREW:  You were talking about what an atomic unit is, obviously a piece of a paragraph necessarily but could it also be, like, five paragraphs?  Or would you normally --
>> Well, you could do, like, sections could be one of your elements.
ANDREW:  Or can units be nested?  You have four blocks that goes before and then images that go inside it.
>> Imagining -- I don't know what this UI looks like exactly but imagine that you wrote a bunch of things, a bunch of paragraphs, and there was, maybe, whatever some action that you take that reveals, not in a overwrought kind of switched up the whole thing but it just says, well, this is the structure that we have.  Like, sort of like, you know, interpreted from the thing that you've created and then gave you some easy way to expand or sort of contract, like, different chunks, right?  And say, I actually want this chunk to actually all be here and then the other thing that would be interesting is, right, once it has determined the structure that it would also, you know, almost, like, simultaneous, like, understand, like, here's what the meaning -- we think this piece right here, we think that this is about you workout so you kind of turn it on and it starts to reveal what it knows about the thing but you can change that.  You can overwrite both the structure and the meaning of that thing to kind of, like, say that.
>> There are all these elements but metadata attached to, metadata that helps the article, or other things that would help, or generate automatically?
>> What it ultimately matters -- it's not the atomic unit, it's the ultimate unit.  It's what it was created and you know going back entirely too far.  The atomic unit at some level is always going to be ones and zeros, so I guess really, maybe the best way to do this is to, you know, allow yourself to go all the way back but only dig as far as you need to.  You know, you don't need to --
>> Give me some baseline or something, right.  Only as much as you need it to be.
ANDREW:  I'm also thinking about it from the perspective thinking about in the limitation I have a 30 paragraph story, each of those is an atomic unit that's fine.  I then have to revision -- let's say I'm storing them in a database and I guess it may be way more implementation than we want right now.  Each one of them is an entity they're all stored in a group, diffing 30 elements.  What's the benefit of diffing that?  Version control of the elements as well.  Version control can be based on in the order of these units or how these orders have changed and the other thing as well when we're dealing with presentation versus editing a block quote would be part of the content -- a unit but at the same time, a poll quote is not.  A poll quote is presentation but its actual presentation in the document is more about presentation that it is about the content model.  So it's something else to maybe think about as well opinion.
>> Well, you can get that in work flow because I think it is 'cause the crazy thing about poll quotes is that they are a presentation but they are such a statement content-wise, right?  Like, what you decide to be the poll is really interesting you know?  Which is why there's a whole verge poll quotes Twitter feed now.  Lots of jokes.  But that's, I think it's interesting.  I think this is cool stuff.
ANDREW:  Anybody have anything to adds to either of these about how they tie together or anything else?  I mean, that was the summaries, so we have about 15 minutes left.  I don't know how else we would close this out other than --
>> When are you guys going to build it?  I thought you were WordPress?
>> I shipped it five minutes ago while you were blabbing.  That's.
CHRIS:  One thing that I noticed was that we were trying -- we set out to just talk about two highly focused things but just by the may have of the CS being a monolith just talking about version control, and, like, there's a lot of cross -- similar communication.  We talked about, like, all -- I started --
ANDREW:  Everything on here is who was discussed.
CHRIS:  Pretty much.
>> So like what do you guys think is actually achievable?  I mean we've kind of driven off of a cliff here.
ANDREW:  So one thing that I normally end up seeing, at least in my line of work, is that a discrete piece of this looks achievable and then you either start building it and you start specing out and you start building this other thing and it spirals and then you come up with one of those and that, and you realize oh shit we have to do that as well.  And at this point, this is obviously together, or even individually, these two ideas are way too big to be chewed on in any short length of time but ultimately, they are problems that need to be solved.  I don't -- I mean, does anybody have any ideas how this can be broken down.  So what are the next steps, what needs to be built on top of an existing system now to make something better?
>> You just keep it super fucking simple, right?  I know it sounds absurd.  So, actually Matt brought this up.  Do we even bother integrating this?  So does WordPress, does Chorus, do any of our CMSs embark on this or that to encode it into the monoliths that we currently work with?  And I honestly think that it's much simply if you don't and you worry about -- so for example, let's say so you got this create content model, right, and it works really well and I've got an editor that speaks to it.  And you know, I've solved these problems of how is it going to talk to this and it's really great, right?  But then you're like, oh, but we have all these people who are -- they're -- we have a bunch of writers now, we have this site in India.  We have a bunch of -- we have a bunch of rural subsistence farmers in India who all have great cell phones and they have no Internet but they can text articles to this content model, right?  So now you have to figure out how to translate this into that.  So Punt -- so say, here's this API, here's a means of translating.  And this editor -- this cool, this sweet editor that we've worked on and translate it into this content model because honestly, it probably is TinyMCE, right?  TinyMCE works great.  It's a WYSIWYG editor that that we all simultaneously loathe and love.  Do we all want to rebuild Medium?  I don't know.  So being able to dump that into the contented model is an A pickup API process thinking about what's the easiest way to do this, did coupling things, and not worry about how they relate to each other as one, let you go, monolithic project.
>> I think you ever to -- you have to decouple this stuff be decouple some of the, like, problems to solve, right, and then try to set yourself up with an architecture to be able to kind of layer these things on over time.
>> What is that architecture, what does it look like?  And more importantly how can you do it so that people don't try to solve all the little things 100 different things so that it doesn't talk to each other?  Okay, so Medium's built something that none of us can use?
>> I don't know, "Talk to each other?"  I don't know.  That's an interesting question.  Like, I mean, we brought it up here.  We were talking about, "Oh, we gotta find some standards or some interoperability."  I think we put sometimes the standards before the solutions and we get ourselves into trouble with that, right?  And I'm not saying that we shouldn't try to seek out the standards and try to get to these places but, I think, like, you know when you start to -- you know, for a long time, it seemed like there would be these ideas that we would all talk about and nobody would just go and try and do them and they would sort of get hung up on, "Oh, we're going to try and do the standard for it," or, "We're going to try to integrate this standard for this one thing" and that was one big requirement that we made for ourselves instead of trying to make something and show it where we can start to say, okay now we can start to open this up.  And there may not be agreement on all that, but at least you have some proofs of concepts.  And what I'm hopeful -- I get really excited because I see already folks working on, like, opening up their text editor stuff and I see a lot of -- there's more of these conversations happening than there's ever happened before.  For a long time we would get credit for shit at Vox Media that we did instead of talking about it.  And now, I think we're getting to a place where lots of people are doing some really cool projects and, like, showing them to each other.  So one of the things that we're doing is we're actually barking on this type of work right now at Vox Media.  And some of the stuff that we're thinking about is how do we start to share out what we're learning from that and how can we bite off what we chew for that.  But we're making a big commitment right now to really be working, focusing a lot of effort, and energy and investment into the problem, right?  So hopefully we'll find a way they can't if we do break it up, those are more shareable, and like, learnable from other folks but I think we just need to start -- those who can, should, you know?
>> And if we get -- if any of us does this and we, like, ship something at any of our organizations, right, it is much better to be perceived as having gotten it wrong and to have done it than have somebody come out can and say, "No, you're wrong and this is how you do it."  And now you have two implementations to solve these problems that you could coalesce on time.  That to me, that's huge.  We've all worked in organizations for the longest time at least not for me, I'm really new for the journalism world.  A lot these last two days have been great.  I've loved this but every organization that I've worked in have said we've solved this problem and I'm tell you right now it's not landing a man on the moon and I'm not going to share it with anybody because it's secret sauce and like, get somebody out there.  If you decouple it like this, you don't have to release the whole platform.  Release a small part of it and have somebody come along and say, you're stupid or, like, this is not complete.  All right, then make it complete, right?  And, I think that's really, really exciting.
>> I think if there were more people doing experimentations in decoupling stuff in their systems.  All of us are guilty of, like, doing these things 'cause it's easier to do things this way because if we start to break this up and start to think what it means to do that.  I think that would be awesome and maintaining user experiences and sharing our success with that because I think this is what I see in every other model that I go out and look at right now and talk to people about doing things and share.  Like, what I don't like about ours but this is what I don't like.  And ours is relatively, like, it has some flexibility and some interesting stuff but it's just a layer up.  We just focused on doing it from the direction of user presentation rather than, like, trying to decouple it.
>> So I have a question, and Chris maybe you can answer this, and it may be totally irrelevant because it was built years ago but what's the state of the Armstrong CMS and all the investment that was put into that?  We had developers download it and try to use it and they said that it was incredibly buggy because it hadn't been updated for so long.  Are those ideas even relevant today?  Could they be built off of?
CHRIS:  Well, the idea, one of the strange things that the Armstrong CMS has a lot of components and it's an a la carte pick and choose but the problems that the Armstrong CMSs was trying to solve was pretty much none of these.  There were things like how do I sketch little articles to show up at a certain time of day?  How do I get articles to render in a certain context?  So it's kind of interesting that the problems that we ended up solving were not -- they were -- we were designed -- we were developing software for other developers; not for users.  And there was some other strange things about the project, as well.  There is, like, a -- there's a couple subprojects that are still being developed.  And there's a there's basically a whole new base for about -- there's a small core of apps that are -- that have entirely new base underneath them.  And so I'm still, like, ambivalent about the project.  There's still a lot of components that I believe in but, like, the Node is a project for other Django developers but it's not designed for a variety of user experience.
>> And the Django thing I was wondering when we talk about content models, Vox builds rails which is very opinionated about its models.  I was wondering if there's a point where building on top of a framework with a certain type of content model is not going to work?
>> I mean, it's relatively decoupled, I mean, it's somewhat opinionaid but we've started decoupling some of that stuff so I think the framework's -- I think what's happened with a lot of frameworks were the opinionated parts.  You were, over time, you start to not rely on those opinions as much as you are.  And I think it's true for a lot of folks in different frameworks and I think that's -- you know, you start to want to give yourself flexibility.  You get, sort of, find yourself, like, stuck in those opinions and so, you wiggle your way out of them.  And I think like, you know, a lot of the -- we're architecturing towards like, not not being concerned.  We're just trying to get as much value out of rails being rails as we can but I just don't think that it's as much of an issue.  I don't know how that applies to Django.  I mean, it's like a --
ANDREW:  -- I think that's a separate one for sure.
>> 'Cause it's such a -- it's a -- it was more opinionated in a particular direction, solving a more --
ANDREW:  -- a higher level than Rails.  PHP obviously for us is even lower than that.
>> Even lower.
CHRIS:  There was actually two things about Django that I wanted to mention.  One is that we've started rethinking the Django CMS.  There is a protocol Django -- product called Django CMS.  I'm not talking about that.  But traditionally when you give your staff the Django CMS, they're the Django admin, which is a developer interface; not a user interface.  So internally we started kind of rebranding that and saying, no, that's not the CMS.  That's actually the developer admin.  And the other thing that I wanted to mention is that, this past week I've been doing a lot of research with the -- with using WordPress as an interface for getting data into Django and so far, the experimentation's been -- have been --
>> That's what we did at the Sunlight Foundation.
CHRIS:  I talked to Jeremy.
>> Jeremy, cool.
CHRIS:  So there's projects at the base level but I'm doing stuff at the base API.
>> Yahoo, it WordPress to whatever CMS they use to publish the site.
>> Yeah, shit's weird these days, man.  What is even happening anymore?  Cats and dogs, man.
ANDREW:  It's weird because sometimes you see the content, WordPress is an example.  Sometimes you see it as a content story, sometimes you see it only as an user interface.  Schoolbook, which was this application in New York Times a few years ago.  They used it purely for the backend.  jQuery, like jquery.com and all their 25 sites, they don't use it for the backend; they use it for the theming.  And all their content is stored in Git repos that is then adjusted and shoved into the database so they don't even touch the backend which is usually what host people if they were going to pick one piece they would use but everyone's using some other aspect, and you're not even using it for the content repository either you're using it for the dashboard and stuff like that. everything should start with the API.  Anybody have any interesting concluding remarks, or should that be me...?
CHRIS:  Have you heard of the horse radish project?
>> No.
CHRIS:  It's something working on for -- Jeremy's working on for doing image management in WordPress.  and I think it's in a state where it's internally useable at Sunlight.
>> For image management?
CHRIS:  For WordPress, yeah.  So it's got elastic search.
>> You weren't fast enough.
>> How do I find this on Google?
CHRIS:  Lab/horseradish.
>> Sweet, I find a typo in the first thing, settings.py.
CHRIS:  It's a Django app for managing WordPress.
ANDREW:  Throw Ruby in there for a shell script.
>> Can we get some Perl?
ANDREW:  It is now 5:30 thank you all for coming.  This was fantastic.  I was really -- we were both really nerves that we wouldn't come away with anything beyond a list of gripes and I think we have way more than that to work on.  I know that we're working on a lot of these problems, and I know that obviously Vox is working on all of these problems, really everyone's trying to solve these things cool not having roadmaps but things of this nature is really awesome.  I hope you enjoyed SRCCON, ask I hope to see you guys around and CMSs -- yeah!  
