This is a DRAFT TRANSCRIPT from a live session at SRCCON 2014. This transcript should be considered provisional, and if you were in attendance (or spot an obvious error) we'd love your help fixing it. More information on SRCCON is available at http://srccon.org.

Captioning by the wonderful people of White Coat Captioning, LLC
whitecoatcaptioning.com


SRCCON 2014
Session 26 7-25-14, 1230-1330
Franklin 2
"How to diversify the pipeline of journo-coders"
Session leader(s): Emma Carew Grovum and Latoya Peterson
--

LATOYA:  All right.  Welcome, how are you?
>> Great.
LATOYA:  So we are all here presumably to talk about diversifying the line.  And the funny joke about this.  And by the way if you don't know me, I'm Latoya.
EMMA:  I'm Emma.
LATOYA:  I was going to introduce you!  Anyway.  Emma and I are great friends and I am friends with a lot of people in this room.  But you might not know this.  I run a site called Racial Issues and I got into this by essentially critiquing how this represented people and poor people of color.  And a lot of things have changed now and now I'm at the place where I'm looking at how are we going to fix this problem that we have been talking about, you know, since I've been into it since 2008 and since the industry at large has started, right?  You'll notice that this trend is not a trend that's unusual to journalists, right?  Journalists have always had issues with the newsrooms.  And there's a peak point in the 90s where things got better and then it all slid downhill.  So the thing that I hate is that we all get together, and we have these talks that we need to diversify.  But yet again year after year we're in the same spaces.  The people who are least likely to need this talk is are here.  And the people who are most interested in this talk have left.  We're going to start out with the more traditional type tactics, what's going on?  What's an ally?  How do we talk to people about what's going on in the newsroom?  But everybody's probably going to leave here with an action plan and maybe some Starbursts but we're leaving here with an action plan because we need to be tired of hoping that things are going to get better in terms of diversity.  We need to stop pretending that if two of us are cool that our horribly toxic organization is going to get better.  We need to stop pretending that every time we make a new friend, that's of color ask we try to get them to come over for something, we need to stop that, right?  And each of us is going to commit to a very easy, very doable plan of action which means that a lot easier when we come back together, I.  Don't know, Aaron what's your plans for next year?
>> We're making that tomorrow.
LATOYA:  We're making that tomorrow?  Awesome.
>> Tell us what you're thinking.
LATOYA:  So I was thinking like you go to SRCCON and a lot of us tend to travel in a lot of the same circles.  So I'm sure you're at least familiar with some of the people that you saw here, or met here., maybe we're all at certain types of conferences, you might go to OTHA, or South by Southwest, or you might meet people in all of these different places.  And in next time we meet up.  We.  And we actually have an honest conversation about this.  But you see, if not, actually it's not going to change.  And this is actually a much bigger group than I anticipated, which is great because it's very easy to get ten people on the same page.  But this is, like, 30, so we're going to do it the best we can.  So I'm going to kick it off to the lovely and talented Emma Carew Grovum.  Who's going to talk about the lovely outline and I'll come back to you guys with the secondhand plan.
EMMA:  Kind of specific to the pipeline issue, falling into three major buckets.  There's nobody to hire, there's not enough students coming out with these skills, not enough people to grab at interns to another entry level jobs.  How do we fix that problem.  And then the second problem is managers' hiring things.  So a lot of these organizations, they may be have found those one or two interns, or found that one person.  But by and large, the management, the people who are creating the jobs are older, probably white, probably male, probably not a lot happening there and then the third bucket would be speakers, conferences and events.  How do you change that up?  People being brought in as keynote speakers, or panelists and things who are reaching out and beyond, and not just asking Latoya to appear on any panel so that she can go home and enjoy her life.  So I'm really curious what everybody else, like, thinks.  Like, what have you seen as a problem?  What is an issue that you personally have with, like, any of these, or like... yes?
>> Ten minutes ago I had a related thing.  So we're doing admissions for a training program for boot camps, I guess that falls under students and I think that's great is that we have -- they made a scholarship for women, under-represented minorities, and service members.  So we have this -- so we have this application in our pipeline and one of the reviewers is saying, I don't know about this girl, or woman -- I don't know about this application.  And then the next comment was, well, we need more women in the funnel, so let's push her forward to an interview.  And that, to me, it raises the question:  Is that the best way to approach it?  If we're lowering a bar, is that the best thing that we can do?  Because that builds in the assumption that well, if we want to do this, we have to lower the bar.  And I think an alternative is, we don't have the best reach, right?  Not that many -- not the greatest percentage of the population at large knows that we exist.  So, how could we, like, overrepresent those communities we want to retract in our outreach?  So that is something that I would like to learn more about because you know, it would be a shame to have -- to do the bar-lowering when if there are people out there who would be fantastic and just haven't heard of us.
EMMA:  I think the flip side of that it assumes that everybody who's not in those targeted groups also got their because they deserve to and I think that that is, like, a false assumption.  Like, you could look at any company and any industry and there are people at every level of employment who are men, who are women, who are white, who are not white who got there on a favorite, who got there, you know, through their legacy, or they got there for some other reason besides their talent and I think a lot of people ask this question of well, whether do we want to lower the bar.  Is it okay to take this person because they're of color but they're not quite what we're looking for?  And I think a lot of people have asked that -- have answered that question but not explicitly answered that question when the candidates were of color, when the candidates weren't men.
>> I just want to build on that and say, we have some really solid research from the last ten years about things what happens when you submit the same resume with different names on it.  It is passed up a lot faster if it's an anglicized, male name.  So there is a lot of stuff when we talk about things like lowering the bar.  You're getting into some pretty deep pulls.  And there are some things that show the kind of bias that we're fighting.  So I just want to, like, get that out there in the front of the conversation.
EMMA:  Yeah, that's awesome.
>> I've experienced a lot of -- I mean, I don't think the answer's lowering the bar, you don't have to.  A lot of us are out there.  I've been a journalist for more than 20 years.  A developer for 17.  And if you're not -- at this point, over the last four years, it's a very closed circle.  You only get hired if you're --
EMMA:  Sure.
>> -- if you know someone.
EMMA:  So it's not just reach, it's prominence.
>> It's breaking into what is now a very closed circle.  I mean, I've gotten passed over just dozens of times.  I've always gotten an interview but I didn't ever -- I got passed over for somebody half my age and the opposite gender.
EMMA:  Is anybody in the room doing hiring?  Can we answer that?
>> I'd actually be interested to know -- sorry, you do that thing, first.
EMMA:  Nope, go ahead.
>> I'd be interested to know how many people, their first jobs in journalism were sort of near their home town, or at least in -- I guess my point is, generally you start out with a smaller newspaper.  Generally those are in less-diverse areas.  I know for me I live and work in Maine, that's where I'm from and it's 98% white.  And so you're --
EMMA:  The newsroom or the community?
>> The community.  And, whitest state in the country.
LATOYA:  Let me take that because it's really interesting and it's a good point, too.  Because this happened to me out in the bay area when we were on Twitter, oh, my God there's no black people.  Have you seen San Francisco?  Like, Twitter's not hiring black people.  We're not there.  But there are many other people there, Latinos and Asians in particular.  So you want to look at those rates.  But region has a big role to play on how you can diversify.  But at the same time I love your question because it gets to something I kind of hate about the first part of this pipeline, right, which is that people assume that there is one path to getting into, you know, journalism.  And for many, many years, that was the case that you went and you did your small town stuff and then you worked on it and then you started going regional and you're hoping eventually in your career that you go national.  Have you seen what's happening lately?  That's been decimated.
EMMA:  And I think that's especially amplified for technologists and coders anybody on the web.
LATOYA:  Right and I would have never come in that part.  And -- I'm in a good position, like, whoo, it's great but one of the things that I like to point out to people when they ask me questions.  I look at your job and the first thing I go is, you ask for a four-year degree like Al Jazeera, a four year degree preferably from a prestigious school and that was their code for "Ivy."  That was essentially it -- automatically off the bracket.  It doesn't matter if you are actually looking for me.  You just said in your job application you are not looking for me but the reason I got in at Al Jazeera was because the person who hired me was very, very familiar with what I was doing, what I was building, and what I bring to the brand and so she made an assumption of skills and she targeted everything around skills.  So it didn't matter necessarily where people were coming from.  She didn't go to recruit people generally for the stream.  She went to place like kids who are doing foreign policy.  She wants people who lived two years in Syria.  She wanted people who speak six languages and I'll teach them the journalism part.  She wanted people who were digital.  She wanted people who were great on Twitter, great on Instagram, and pulled all of those people together and then taught them the skills that they needed.  And I noticed that in that mindset that we're okay.  This is kind of what we want, okay, and I think we can mold this person who what we need is.  And that doesn't happen.  We want everybody to be perfect out of the box just like how we get those unicorn job ads.  That's one of my favorite things, looking at job ads and laughing at them because there's an organization that I love.  I called them and they wanted a -- they want a front end and a back end developer.  So these two different skill sets and I want you to be able to do all of our website, copy, good with Photoshop and good with jQuery and Python, and if you find that unicorn, and they will work for you for $80,000 a year, I will give you $400 out of my pocket 'cause that's bullshit and that's not going to happen.  Anybody that can do both of those things is very high demand and they might love justice as much as I do but they're not going to deal with that.  Front end developers have skills.  And I understand the grant funding says this.  I need to prioritize but, I think part of this is understanding kind of what you're looking for, what you're asking for.  If you're just looking for students and interns, you're overlooking a big part of the workplace that maybe is self-taught, maybe has learned these skills.  I did an informal poll on TLM, Tech Lady Mafia -- it's a really great ListServ.  Feel free to talk to -- I don't know, Gene, Genie, she's the person you want to talk to, she wants to get on TLM.  But I put on that ListServ, an informal poll how many people -- because I was reading a bunch of articles about the pipeline -- how many people basically majored in computer science or engineering with a four year degree program, right?  And it was interesting.  It was about half and half.  People who did back end were more likely to have majored in computer science and stuff like that.  And they were doing more complex code and can agile languages and more -- the folks that were in the careers I'm in, we're doing digital planning, storytelling and a lot of us pick that stuff up, right?  We did weekend classes.  You went to general assembly.  You went to girl development.  You did these things and you learned the stuff that you should to make the project look cool and now you can do it in the newsroom and figure out how to do it for cheap and things like that.  So figuring out what's actually priority and what's nice to have.  And being brutal about what the types that you want.  And I would suggest that particularly for us many hiring positions start looking at people that you want to hire, sit down and interview them, and have coffee and ask them how they are because I could guarantee you that a lot of us didn't and through these traditional channels.  I did two years under this person and then I took this official practices class.  A lot of it was I was doing this one career and then there was the tech and there was the Internet, and here I am.  So figuring out kind of the people that you would like to work with but the skills that they have in common, what traits they have in common, and then figuring that out.  Anyway, back to Emma.
EMMA:  Well, they're talking specifically about people in the pipeline.  But for me, people existing in silos.  I remember the age of Asian-American Journal Association.  Robert is the manager for Hispanic -- to hire and Latoya is part of the National Association of Black Journalists and she's only looking for more black journalists to hire.  Like, that is total bullshit and I think a lot of people are looking at one sum game whereas if I hire a straight black woman, then that means that you know, nobody else can hire that position and we're good.  We're totally good.  We've checked off all our boxes and we're good for the year.  It's like are you hiring women?  Are you hiring those who are LGBT?  Are you hiring people who are multiracial and does your news organization have people who came from other areas?  I'm in D.C. so a lot of people like, my entire staff went to Ivy Leagues except for me I went to public school and, like, that is it.  And so are you looking at other things like that?  Are you hiring people from the Midwest when you went to do your event planning or are all your speakers from New York and San Francisco?  Like that is a real thing.  So I think if we're thinking about diversity on the big picture like holisticly, that is like very important.  Yes?  We'll go this way.
EMMA:  If you have something that's directly relevant to that?
>> I was going to say that it's also, you know, disability diversity, like, how many people have a blind person in their newsroom?  How many people have a deaf person in their newsroom?  Are we actually thinking about how would this tool used by a low vision user or a no-vision user?  You know, odds are we have colorblind people now newsroom but do we actually know that we have colorblind users there?
EMMA:  And becuse we have colorblind and our graphics and designs should be run through color code or something so that we're accessible to our readers and things because we're developing a newsroom and we're not just putting out content.  It's -- 
STAN:  Can you slow down just a little bit?  When you get going sometimes it's really hard to understand you.  Sorry!
EMMA:  So my joke at the beginning when I started was awkward public speaker.  Yes.  Somebody else?
>> I was just going to ask, also the importance of socioeconomic status of people in your newsroom and what that means in terms of the training and support that you need to offer to people in order to get them and the required investment for that, in that there's a lot of value in having someone who doesn't come from an Ivy League school but sometimes that means that you need to help them grow their skill set in order to succeed in that position because they come from different resources and access.
EMMA:  How many people have worked for a newsroom that assumes that you come in with a smartphone, or assume that you have your own laptop at your own personal disposal to bring in to work with on the road or in the newsroom?  For example, like my newsroom doesn't have enough computers for everybody, which is a problem.  Sorry?
>> I have something sort of related to this skill question that you mentioned before, Latoya, but to the accessibility point, I went to a conference a couple of months ago it wasn't really journalism but they had an accessibility panel and everybody was like yeah, this is great.  We should all enable ourselves to be accessible but I heard the developer behind me say, but nobody's going to pay for that, and how do you prove to your editors and everybody that that's worthwhile and to make sure that it satisfies all these accessibility requirements?  How do you prove that out as being something that you need to invest in?  And you said something about socioeconomic status, too.  And I wanted to say that, I think it assumes that you're coming in with a smartphone or a computer that you paid for yourself, because the salary you're probably getting is not going to let you have an elaborate -- I'm assuming you're supposed to be a status that is all pretty, like, low, when I don't know what other people make in newsrooms but the salaries are pretty modest in most of the ones that I've been exposed to and when you're an intern, and you're volunteering your time, you need to come in with your own outside of that.
EMMA:  -- hopefully not.
>> -- but to your skill point this is mostly women focused.  And I worked for the New York-based Girl Develop It and so we have curriculum to help women to learn to code but we've had other female -- and, it's all about getting developers who are starting out to have those skills that populate your resume with things that people want to hire for.  So like, writing and contributing to journals, or whatever, or open-sourcing projects and then speaking about your things.  How do you pitch a proposal to your conference?  How do you feel confident in your abilities as a developer to contribute to those and then the coding?  How do you get your stuff out on GitHub to get it out there?  You won't get hired necessarily for the elaborate insane stack of things that they expect but in an interview you can prove your utility by having all those ancillary experiences and I feel like there are very few conferences that focus on just developing those skills.  And I think it's an intimidation point, you know?  You didn't go to school for CS, you don't feel comfortable pitching ideas for conferences, you don't feel comfortable public speaking, or contributing to open-source, doing any of the other things that help out.
EMMA:  Can I pick out on Genie because, I also wish I could go find Erika.  I'm actually going to go grab her.
>> I actually think, I will also just say that I just gave a talk with for ONA Boston the night before I came here about diversity and online journalism.  And, one of the points that I stressed heavily was that it requires a deep investment.  And just like when you go to build a piece of technology, frequently it takes longer than you expect or more resources than you expect.  So you can apply that to your strategy of diversifying in that, you know, there's a couple other things, too in terms of your -- you really need to have buy-in from your leadership in order for the strategy to succeed.  So identifying ways that you can entice, or persuade leadership if they're not an already on-board with that.  So it's kind of like a two-pronged thing because I've learned that even when leadership is totally on board, that doesn't necessarily mean that they're ready to invest in the development of moving into new spaces and expanding your community.  And so what does that mean in order?  That means that you have to work kind of extra hard to make that happen.  And you also have to do a lot of landwork in terms of explaining the value of that and proving that to the leaders.
EMMA:  There were some questions about how you did outreach to diversify speakers in the attendees of SRCCON?
>> Okay, there were a few types of outreach that we did.  One was outreach to individuals, both people who we already knew were awesome and we wanted to participate as well as people to recommend other people on the registration for SRCCON.  There is a question like, are there people who we may not already know who should be here?  So like, asking explicitly was one piece of it.  Um, I think another piece of it is just kind of um, like constant ongoing relationship-building.  So it's not just that we like pop out of the sky and it's like, "Oh, there's the thing happening and we really need to find people."  But we are in communication with people at other events, in other communities like, throughout the years so there is already is an existing relationship to say, "And now there's this other thing happening that we would really appreciate your help with."  I think a few specific things there are people who had, like, written for SRC before.  We reached out to those. folks.  Or people who did MozFest.  People who were involved with, we connected those people.  So I think those were the two big things.  Explicit asks and ongoing relationship-building is part of what really helped and then it was something that we were conscious of at every stage of the process in terms of selecting speakers, in terms of the makeup of the participants.  It was something that we were explicitly conscious of and it wasn't, "Oh, well we'll figure it out later."  I think one other element was we also had travel scholarships and part of the travel scholarships was for people who wouldn't otherwise be able to attend or are under-represented in journalism/technology, which is both in terms of racial and gender diversity, but also in terms of, as you heard in the opening, lots of people from the coasts.  Not as many people from not from the coasts.  So geographic diversity, types of organizations, types of organizations that may not even be news organizations.  So all different types of diversity in terms of journalism/technology.
>> Can I just add one more thing, too?  One strategy that we found really successful is foregrounding women and people of color.  So part of that meant we made sure that after the event, the photos that went up were not just exclusively white so that you're inviting people to come to spaces.  So for example at ONA, the first year that I was there, which was in 2010 there was a lot of push-back around, like, oh, this seems like it was just like mostly white people here.  So the leadership really took that to heart.  Robert Hernandez was on the board, and he was then -- he was one of the very active leaders in the board meeting saying, "This is important, we need to make this a priority," which meant that there wasn't a push-back when I said to our developer, "Hey, you have to dig a little bit further to make sure that you put a person of color on the front page of our site that people know that they're invited."
EMMA:  But it's also -- like, it's organic.  You didn't just collect the four people of color, make them pose in a picture --
>> We had to Photoshop a black person.
EMMA:  -- with the four people of color, being copied and pasted onto every single page.  That's terrible but you didn't have that.
>> But the other thing is, identifying influencers in the community.  So like, Robert is one and putting them in leadership position.  Michelle Johnson from BU is one.  That totally opens doors when you have a diverse student newsroom.  Then all of a sudden this rising crowd of people feel like they're a part of this community and they want to come and join in, and they take a lot of pride in it.  I mean, I had women from the student newsroom last year, like, coming up to me nearly in tears because they were so excited and overwhelmed to be a part of this experience and it was something -- it was a space that they had never been able to enter safely before.
>> I can add?  Can I --
EMMA:  Yup, go ahead.
>> I think, adding on to what she said, I think that was one of the people who was a part of the newsroom last year, and I don't think that had I not had that opportunity, I had gone to ONA or even thought of moving into a -- to meet a lot of people who are here today. 
>> It's both a top-down and a bottom-up strategy.
>> And I think because of that I spread the word to other students saying, hey you should -- other students who are either of under-represented backgrounds -- you should also apply to the student newsroom and get involved with ONA.
>> Um, we're talking a lot about hiring but, you know, in my experience as a journalist, up until about a year ago was almost exclusively as a freelancer.  So I think there's an element there of, you know, if you don't have hiring power, or whatever, that's fine.  Like, still maybe try to get assignments, you know, diversified a little bit even if it's for a small little thing.  And the interesting thing that is, that counts as a credential for them -- even if you make the commitment to hire them and maybe they could work for your competitors, fine.  You only threw, like, a low budget project at them.
EMMA:  That's a really good point.  What else?  I'm curious what -- yes?
>> When you --
LATOYA:  Just a quick time check before your question.  We're at 12:58 and we want to roll.  Let's get the question and if there's any specific question that you want to toss out we can because we'll have time for questions when we start outlining the plans.  But if there's a question that's bothering you, or there's a situation that happened like that Lorie so bravely shared because it's hard to say, hey, we tried.  Now's the time to get that out because now's the time where we get into what we can do and start moving forward.
>> This is more of a little observation which I was set to write speak code and it was pretty eye-opening because women and men function differently in a work situation.  And it almost every single woman.  It became very clear.  Women say "we" instead of I so the assumption is that you didn't do the work.  Women aren't afraid to ask questions.  For men, it's much more, "Ooh then I'm weak that I don't know."  So women ask questions.  And again, it's assumed that they don't know what they're doing.  So... and women tend to be more collaborative and inclusive.  It explains a lot of my work situation so...
>> Which kind of goes to what Lorie was saying was that sometimes it's not actually that your female applicants are less qualified it might be that you have attitudes that make them less qualified.  So sometimes it's not strictly a resume thing.  Sometimes you just kind of have to.  You and your staff have to examine what your attitudes are, would I be feeling the same way if this was a man?
>> I think the biggest challenge with everybody is the imposter syndrome.  The guy that was -- the first panel I went to, who are we missing?  Tall, white dude.  It was a developer and he and I were chatting afterwards and he said, I felt like I don't belong here.  And I'm like, dude you belong here and it's not like -- it's just we all kind of feel like they're going to find out I'm full of shit any second now.
EMMA:  For sure.  When I showed up, the same thing.
>> And for me, too.  And I've been in the industry for, like, ever.  And it's really, the thing with this conference, I was behind the scenes pushing, like, have you thought about this person?  Oh, they can volunteer.  And my note is, don't put them in volunteer mode because that treats them like, you couldn't afford to be here.  So trying to put that table there.  And it is, even though, I mean like love this community, it is still very intimidating when you see, like, oh, shit, there's all of Brooklyn sitting at this table and I'm over here.  How do I say hello?  Someone was like, is there anybody here from the New York Times?  I'm going to do a poll on this repo, and I want to talk to him first but I'm nervous about it.  And I'm like, holy shit, has an.  We all have that on different levels.  That was like the biggest challenge.
>> But there was another thing to recognize, too, and that's that as we're seeing this sort of rise of stars in the industry which tend to be white and male and thinking about why they're rising, part of that is the how difficult it is -- how aggressive and violent it can sometimes be on the Internet for women and people of color and how challenging it is to rise above that, right?  So like one example is a friend of mine just this week wrote a post that was slightly controversial where she was calling out sexism for something, and it had 1700 comments.  These people, like, went into your Instagram feed and pulled out pictures of her son and started, like, threatening her and her son.  And you know, these threats are very real except we don't make space to talk about them or address them in the newsroom at all but they are definitely big inhibitors in the rise and the success of these communities.
EMMA:  And you guys are big horizontal loyalty people, right?  So it's like, who are you promoting?  Who are you constantly referring to and referencing and recommending for things?  And do they just like you?  Did they go to school with you and then you went to the same internship together and now you work together?  What does your network look like and how do you change that?
LATOYA:  Perfect, can we put a pin in the spark and I really want people to walk away with actions and things that we can be doing so that next year we can talk.  Can you put a pin in the violence part?  Because we need to share strategies on that.
>> The only thing that I was thinking about also is thinking about our attitude and our culture because I think things work best when -- because it's actually better to have.  It's not like I want to do this because it's the right thing to do.  It's actually better to have more viewpoints.  It's actually fun to have different kinds of friends.  And how do we, like -- while it's also fun to be doing that, and getting great results I think that's, like, the best of all worlds and is there a way to promote that?
LATOYA:  And I think one thing that people might not realize particularly if you're in a more monochromatic space.  So someone like me, if I walk is in and you tell me that you have an all-white newsroom.  I'm automatically going to think that you're going to be hostile to me.  And there have been very nice, high, grand organizations that I've been recording and the first thing that I was looking at, everybody who's of color here has left within a year.  This is not a space for me.  I'm not going to consider you.  So that's also something that it might not be immediately apparent but also understanding how people of color would view this.  It might be an accident, it might be happenstance that when your team came together and it's all guys.  Or your team came together, and it's all white people or 50-plus of the similar background but that also sends a signal that's what you're most comfortable with.  But we all have stories.  But I want to get into the plan.  So you are not automatically committed to the plan just because you're sitting there.  Don't feel that I have to do all this stuff just because Latoya said so.  If you're interested, though, because one of the things that I decided to do one evening, a poor person, you know, my stories were told incorrectly, and being a person of color I was like, okay I'm going to go into the media.  So I started out.  So I started out freelancing because that's exactly how I got in.  You had friends that are reading you, doing you favors.  Again, with my friends moved on they took me with them and then suddenly I was able to do in the running for being named publication despite the fact that I did not follow any path that would have been remotely recognizable as acceptable to a lot of people.  And to this day, I generally do not send out resumes because they do not work for me.  Generally, people who want to hire me, they will come to me directly.  Me applying for a job, just generally doesn't work out so I almost never do.  So we're going to talk about some things that -- what's up?
>> I said that's so true, I didn't realize that.
>> That's true for, like, almost everyone, though.
LATOYA:  Almost everyone but everyone in a specific way.
EMMA:  Not for people who don't have jobs.  Barrier for underemployed.
LATOYA:  There's a very big part of this that is also how do you get a job?  And a lot of it is, we're doing it through connections:  Who you know.  But we're doing so much more that generally if you put up a resume by yourself, it's not going to stand up.  There's a million reasons that someone's going to look at me and knock me out.  Instead I go around, we have conversations, we make sure you keep things and then when something comes up they normally find a way to make those issues, the things that would make my resume a problem, go away.  It's slightly different than the social networking that most people are asking for because if you do have all those qualifications it helps to me but you might still be able to compete.  Whereas for me it's kind of like can you compete?  Well, it depends on what the metric is.  It depends on what they're looking for.  If you're looking for someone with skills, I got it.  If you're looking for someone who has pedigree, I don't.  I'm also going to tweet it out.  Because that's what I was writing for -- trying to write tweets for too long.  Anyway, so one of the things that I've noticed particularly in my career when I started people asking how they got there was, there are some things that are in common that always seem to happen when somebody starts to rise, right?  One, they have a lot of people watching their backs.  They have a lot of people that are putting them in places that they probably shouldn't go and probably don't deserve to be.  I went to two very transformational conferences, first was South by Southwest 2008, and Web of Change in 2009.  And I went to both of those on an accident, on a whim.  South by Southwest is supposed to be super techie.  I can't go, I'm pregnant, you go.  And I sat there, I met so many people.  It took me straight from being I'm a writer to, "Oh shit I'm a technologist" because I was suddenly immersed.  It so happened that this was the first time that South by Southwest had -- I was excited so we got 50 people.  Fifty of us, right?  And this was like a conference in 2000.  It's like there are 50 of us and so they were looking for every single person that they might not know.  They pulled us into a clip, it was an arching, warm space.  And this is what agile development is.  This is what you could be doing.  This is where web standards are wrong.  This is what you're thinking about.  This is a person that you need to meet.  Changed the outcome of my career dramatically.  I had a friend who was on the board, Kenny who was like, you need to come to this conference.  Web of Change, it's kind of like Politicos + tech retreat.  It's where people design a lot of things for specific engagements and non-profits go to island way the hell out at the end of world, and you know, spend time together and spend four days, kind of just talking about best practices and what-have-you.  So you get a lot of upfront close and personal time with these folks.  I wasn't going to be able to afford to go and Kenny managed to do what no one had been able to have, she got me a scholarship.  A stipend scholarship and a place to stay and whatever possible so that everyone can get a small subsidy to go.  But I was like, yeah that knocks out people.  I'm not going to be afford $17,000.  So she made the argument and she really fought for me to be able to come there and me and as a result that was where I got my first job consulting with for media 'cause that's where I met Zack.  And that was the first job when I met Matt, and Eli who works at Upworthy.  And so it's these things that are very important.  People that have your back and people that you share space with, too, sharing your knowledge.  This is a big thing particularly in circles of color and circles of women.  People are afraid to talk about what their salary is.  You don't want to tell people how much money you make.  There's all this judgment with it.  Money, you don't want to deal with it.  But at the same time when you find out that somebody that's close to you that works with you is being dramatically underpaid and you know how much somebody else pays, you should feel you have a responsibility that you at least need to make light of that information.  But you can find things.  So I've started over the years, kind of assembling things.  There's a TCG Salary Guide that was sent out by Creative Careers where they did a poll and a benchmark.  There's always places like Glass Door that help you be more anonymous about it.  But listening in and figured out how people are New York Stating salaries.  And making so much less the rest of their careers just because they did not negotiate hard enough, or they did not understand that they could negotiate in the first place.  So talking about things like money, talking about things like how you got to a certain position.  How did you get that title because a lot of us, we all admire somebody.  We admire saying, "Damn how did you get that job?"  But most of us don't have the courage to go up to everyone we know and say, "Hey how did you get that job?"  So I think it's imperative for all of us here.  Turn that around and here's how I got my job.  If you want to make some time and we'll talk about the steps that it took me to get good at this stuff.  I would love to.  I am not a coder.  I'm a kid who had enough friends.  I could talk enough people into it and it works out.  So my skills would actually be fairly low on the scale.  I'm have very good organizing people to a certain shared goal.  Which is an asset.
EMMA:  And on the flip side of that is also asking uncomfortable questions, like I heard somebody at this conference talking about like their new start-up and they had only made a handful of hires but somebody immediately challenged them saying, "Have you hired any women?"  Because I looked at your website and it was all dudes.  And event's all mumble, mumble, mumble, I don't know, things, things, things.  And she wouldn't drop it, and she said, "Wait, are you going to hire anybody?"  Have you put out any -- "have you tried?"  And me, I thought that was so cool.  And that was the first time that I heard that in a cautiously holiday conversation over coffee.  Those things probably happen over emails, and one-on-one.  But this was public, other people could hear this.  Other people could see and hear this conversation and I thought, that was super, super awesome.  So I would say don't be afraid of those conversations and challenge that in your own newsrooms and challenge that, like, to your own peers.  Like your friend hired somebody -- did you even look harder than that?  Did you try 'cause you should try this group?  Or you should try these people over here.
LATOYA:  Right, and there's also a pinned thing.  Yes, there's also a thing, just really quick on money, right, because is the thing that we also don't talk about this the room in terms of making risks and assessments.  If you were to private the VC thing.  You have $2 million and you have to make the start-up run and your staffing is limited.  A lot of times you want to hire not only the people who have the skills that you need but the people that you trust because you might not have enough money to make this work.  So there is a lot of tension around who we're hiring and why.  So the idea is to figure out and get in the exact moment of, "Okay I need to hire somebody right now."
>> Yeah, I just -- when you're saying that, I just realize that in our workplace, we actually have completely transparent salaries.  Like, we know what every single worker makes.  And I realize that's radical.  And I'm like, you can't just ask other people that and I started questioning that but it is like a structure that reinforces -- 'cause who would be at a disadvantage?  People who were at an advantage everybody knows that what you make is private but is that something we can push against?
EMMA:  Like in Gilman, if you're in a guild you pretty much have a baseline of what most of the people are making, really.  90% of the people but that's, like, pretty rare especially in smaller heed.
LATOYA:  And there's also resources that people have confidentially cobbled together.  There was a Tumblr going around, Who Pays Writers.  It just went around in certain circles in terms of who was paying and what rates.  And there was another poll that just happened with BuzzFeed where people were like, put your salary in and figure it out.  And we'll do a poll of where people are, and how much it is.  Pay attention to these.  And it's really important because you don't get to the point where you're trying to transition levels you're trying to transition into a connected level and you don't have the history or the salary to hatch.  It's an automatic red flag to people who are hiring.
>> I was going to go, I don't want to be -- when you were talking about the start-up hiring thing, I think when you have a company that can only have so many people and you're interviewing people or strangers, to someone's point said that you need people -- you basically need people who can come to the interview and say, I can do this, I can take on this huge weight on this project which is maybe a fourth of the work that needs to be done in the next four months.  And I feel when I have been in interviews, in my previous tech company, we would get all kinds of applicants.  We would get dudes right out of school who would come in and be like, I've never built oa real application but I know I could do it because it must be like the other languages.  So yeah, even though you want three years of experience, we could do it and then we would have women come in saying, I have six years of experience.  And I said, I took a battle.  And I'm not sure, I was on sabbatical.  Making all these self-depricating excuses and when you're in a interview, you're too nervous to even start talking about this.  Like, I'm sorry.  I have to go with a person who thinks they can do that.
EMMA:  So how do you change that outside of the newsroom interview room?  Do we need at these kinds of conferences?  Do we need a session like how to go and be a badass in an interview?
>> But part of this is that is too.  How do we change your mindset?  That person who has imposter syndrome sitting there, that has six years experience isn't the one to hire than the man who doesn't?
>> I'm so for women in coding like, it's beyond.  But it's hard to convince a whole team of people when you're like, I know if I could encourage her.  Because then I'm taking ownership of her and if she can't do something because she's too nervous about it, I have to take ownership of that as well.  So it's -- I think technology is incredibly meritocratic and I think that's awesome when you're on the Internet, if you can achieve androgyny, where you're judged based on your skills.  People will give you so much credit in forums or whatever.  I do respect too, though, that if you put up, like, a blog post upon your to your point before, you can get attacked brutally for it.  But I was thinking the other day, I had some guy on a forum post accuse me of being some skinny white dude in an SS start-up once and I was thinking, "This is so complementary because that's not who I am and that is awesome."
EMMA:  You've made it!
>> I've made it because I'm androgenous on the Internet.
LATOYA:  -- and it's something that, again, when you're dealing with with that at the hiring level it's two things one we can assume that this person can do it and went it's imposter syndrome and they're scared in this interview but if they end up being a scared employee you have many, many more problems that have come for you as manager.  So maybe one of the things that can help is maybe -- and one of the things that I want to suggest, one, is make them meet a buddy up.  I want everyone in this room to make a new friend.  If you don't have any friends of color, make a friend of color.  If you don't have any older friends, make one of those friends because here's what happens.  When you talk through with your friends, your friends are the ones who will be able to sit with you and say, "I don't think you come across as well as you do in this interview.  You're hitting a wall."  I made a new friend.  She's, like, another black mom who was in media and we were like, "Holy shit."  So we ended up being friends and she got rudely rebuffed by a big name news organization that I will not name because it's on the record but a big name news organization and in person who was hiring went back and essentially said, you don't look like you're interested in this kind of career because your resume says -- she didn't ask any other questions and was sort of upset.  There's recruiters that come in NABJ.  I know four people here.  Let's figure out what just happened.  Is it going to be your direct boss?  Is it going to be somebody else?  But I could do that because I have the connections and the know-how.  So okay, you didn't get a good chance to adjust yourself.  Quiz.  Can we talk about this?  Can we figure out what you sent?  I had her send me the email so that I could read it over.  Maybe you didn't want to mention this part.  Maybe you want to explicitly state in your resume that you're transitioning out of television.  But I feel like this in person, like, we're talking to each other.  We're making friends, or whatever.  That cannot be understated.  It's my friend who got me here.  You need to be somebody else's friend just like I tried to be friends with those who are young, starting a career.  Maybe made a mistake.  Where am I'm going to go now?  Trying to be that person to swoop in, fix your portfolio, get you a god damn website, put that stuff up there, fix it because there were people who did that for me and that's what helps, right?  So making new friends.
EMMA:  The best advice that I got is, "You look like you're about to vomit when you interview" and I had like a mental AJ (phonetic) who we were doing mock interviews with and he was like, "Okay, like, you look really nervous and I'm legitimately afraid that you're going to barf on me."  So you have to ring it in.  You gotta try it little harder and that was very, very transformational for me in a lot of ways.  Because who would know that you looked like that you were about to puke on somebody?  So one friend who was very, very honest with you and grabbing people, in a way, that's helpful to them.  Not like, "Hey you suck, go home."  But I think if you can find somebody and because you see something in them whether it's you think that they could have good experience or they could be, you know, kind of taught and shaped into something.  Grab that person and give them unsolicited advice to try to make them better.  Like, that's awesome.
LATOYA:  I was just going to push and say that we have like ten minutes left so if you want to have action plans and you know where the acquire I'm go to be a bit of a dick and say, we know a lot of these things.  What else can we do?  All right, bam.  You want to run through the list and then do open conversation?
EMMA:  We have ten minutes.
LATOYA:  Let's just roll with it, all right?  Last one, go.
>> The -- I think something that didn't exist maybe six months ago, I guess, when it came out was that grant story, Dr. V's Magic.  I won't get into what exactly it was about but, you know, they didn't have anybody on staff that would have recognized the huge problems in this article about -- that addressed like trans issues or whatever.  And then the woman actually killed herself as a result of it and it was just such a disaster for grant land that I think that everybody has a boss.  Not everybody has hiring power.  If you hit a wall where you sort of need to make the case that this is important, I think that the grant land thing was enough of a --
>> It resonates.
>> It just kind of pointed it out and I use that example frequently.
EMMA:  Okay, so who has a solution?
>> I like the plan of the mentor network thing.  I think that's really helpful.  My fiend Lea wrote an app about -- collaborating as mentors in technology, remotely.  So you can sign up for a mentor.  I think those are really helpful.
EMMA:  Is that like a public resource that we can direct people to?
>> Rally?  I think it's called rallyyourgoals.com or something.  But Lea, she's based in Toronto and she has an app like that.  But there are -- I'm sure there's -- there's ListServs, too for this kind of thing.  Or we could set one up where you could join and have people post comments about what they need advice on.  I think that's a solution, potentially.
>> I would say I've heard about this hiring -- or excuse me, diversifying your hiring team, especially for the technical parts of interviews.  Because otherwise, you have the same people hiring the same people over and over again.
LATOYA:  And one of the things that I like that the Knight Fellowship does, like, every single year is they have a core team of people who is always evaluating applications and then they call in a pool of friends and experts to come do the second rounds.  So when they're doing in-person evaluations they have people who care about the Knight Foundation -- the Knight Fellowships but aren't necessarily affiliated, who are of a variety of backgrounds to help give perspectives on these candidates, right?  So that way it's interesting.  They help to take the things and then the final decision is still the same people.  It's still Donald, Jim, and Pam.  But it helps to get other voices without them actually being on staff.  So that's something in a helps bring in the mix.
>> I know we all had a hardy chuckle at binders full of women but I would like to revisit the issue from the other side.  So if it's a white dude saying, "Bring me a binder full of women," it's like, you're an asshole but if you are that start-up or you are that person's like, "Oh crap we've been so busy thinking about all these things about building this business but we want to give an opportunity to somebody else, we don't know anybody else."  If there were a way that people knew about, well, okay, this is how you can start, you might not have made any decision that we wanted you to make because it was ten years ago.  But sure, here's the binder full of women and everybody that you might want to hire.
EMMA:  Fun fact.  Fun fact.  Robert and I work on this project with other people and it's called Diversify Journalism With Me and we started a couple of years ago and we're in the process of relaunching it and the idea is that it's a list.  It's a profile base, not just a spreadsheet of names of people who we know.  People who have been recommended to us.  Who are of color, who are awesome, who should be hired, who should be on panels and it's public and all you have to do is, it's diversify.journalismwith.me.
LATOYA:  Just Google "Journalism With Me."
EMMA:  And like, it literally is just a list of people who are awesome who we have found through me, Robert.  And there's like six other people.  It's a total mix, right, there's -- we're a mix of gender or race, or like, types of things that we do.  Some of us are educators, some of us are in the middle of marriage.  And that was started and we're totally interested in expanding.  And if you've never seen the list, and you need people, hit us up and we'll give you this whole bucket of people or a binder.  They're not really a bucket.
LATOYA:  The whole goal is to destroy the excuse, "I can't find these people."
EMMA:  It is the Internet.  It is the Internet.
>> Or that first thought of, "Shit can we do something?"  Cool.  And then the Trojan horse that goes into the inside.
LATOYA:  But the other thing that I thought was interesting that you just brought up.  This woman was having a problem work and she's like, I'm getting outspoken by all these alpha dudes where it's all white guys and it's me and it was interesting because that ListServ was, "Have you ever been late?  Work with what you have" and challenging power.  It was very different types of things but the overwhelming response that came back was find the alpha white dude, befriend him, and have him if forward your ideas.  But at the same time --
EMMA:  You have to do it.
>> I was like.  Let's twist that a little.  What if we all decided here, everybody who's in here to befriend somebody that is an alpha white male and isn't thinking about these things and be that bug in that person's ear?
>> What if they don't want to be befriended by you?
LATOYA:  Then find another one.  There's a lot.  It's our whole industry.
EMMA:  There are a lot of white dudes out there.
>> I think we have like of the 30 people in this room, maybe seven.  You guys actually are really important.
EMMA:  Yes.  So take that home with you and... and think on that in your hearts.
>> Did anyone see that video?
>> Don't you think there might be a little bit more match-making?
LATOYA:  Match-making?  That's good.
>> Because that's --
>> I think that's one of the things that people forget, like, so I've been into those summits like Spark Camp where they hand-pick people and it's like, how do you have time to tweet or share your work and all that stuff.  And introverts, people always forget about that.
>> I said this at the ONA panel the other day but I spoke to all the white people in the room and said that it's your responsibility to speak up.  So even if you're not the hiring manager, you can express the importance of diversity as your values and the values of good journalism.  And the more -- you know, and call it out when you see it in your industry, when you see hires that are totally homogenous and just say, "Hey, but what about this?  Diversity is important" and remind them 'cause you know, no one -- these hiring managers don't want to be called racist, or sexist, and they don't want to see that.
>> I would avoid framing it that way.  Here's some -- let me help you with some answers.  Like, I'm part of -- we hired two digital professors.
>> Well, sometimes you need to sway people.
>> But you also need to know --
LATOYA:  A lot of people waiting to talk.  Can we pass it?  Boom and boom?
>> My suggestion is put some pressure on the news organizations to release their diversity or lack of diversity just like Google did.  They were horribly embarrassed.  Facebook and Twitter just released it too and it's like -- I mean, it's no surprise, the numbers.  But, you know, it's -- it should be embarrassing to the news organizations.
>> Hey, this handy interactive came out yesterday, I saw.
>> The what?
>> Do you know anything about that?
>> If you guys are interested in this.
LATOYA:  Oh, you did.  You Make It, the project.
>> There's so much hype over data journalism and hype over diversity in the media that I did a data journalism infographic about diversity in the media.  It ran on the Who Pays Writers blog yesterday.  If you guys just search for "Diversity In Journalism" Twitter it'll come up.  I just searched for it.  It's broken on mobile browsers and I just can't deal with that right now.  I'll bring it up on my computer but it's -- yes...
LATOYA:  Ariel has been waiting.
>> A couple points.  Is there an etherpad where I can add links to?  Because I don't know about The Diversity Project but I know about the ArticleNet Network which, is a network of female speakers on technology.  That's also a technology.  There's also a speaker in dotwebapp.com where you can find people --
EMMA:  Just tweet them and use SRCCON and we'll collect them up.
LATOYA:  We'll put a blast out on the etherpad.
>> And in also in New York -- it's New York specific or fenced, but there's an app that says "we can do better" which takes all the start-up's data about their public hiring practices and how diverse their teams are, and it makes it's a little G3 app where you can see where they stand on how diverse their teams are, and who you should apply to if you're working in technology and you want sympathetic team.  So I'll put all those links on whatever.
EMMA:  Just tweet them and use hashtag #university.
LATOYA:  I have, like, 100 people I would add to that.  Nice, we'll do it.  And a quick idea to put out there.  Do we need to do a match speed dating thing?  I loved it at Wham where you can sit down with people who are in your industry fifteen minutes at a time.  But just ask them any kind of questions that was on your mind.  And people asked how to publish a book, how do I deal with the situation, or whatever you come up with and staff the booth.  There's also, you know, I was reporting geek speed dating at the different cons at SDCC and the comic cons.  Maybe we need to have a match-making for media careers -- speed dating.  How do I get your career?  How do I get your job?  What skills do you have because I do this all the time informally?  Because I just met somebody who's the head of NBC and he's an African-American man, been there for a long time.  And just started on TV but he doesn't understand data and the Internet but I do.  And I said, let's trade.  We'll have coffee.  I'll talk to you about how you understand the Internet and you talk to me about how I survive.  But maybe making this more formalized and bringing the people to propose that this space always exists where we can, all right?  Did we get anybody that hasn't already spoken?  Is there somebody that --
>> There's just one really simple thing just to post all your jobs or get management to do so.  I think it's -- I mean, you were saying that sure not everyone goes in through a resume but there's zero possibility of getting new people if you don't actually make it public.
LATOYA:  Good point, good point.  Okay, and you had a comment?
>> Pay your interns and have resources to help them find cheap housing so that you can get people from out of the city.  When you don't pay your interns and they aren't able to get housing then you limit your internships to who can afford to take an unpaid internship in another city that is a really --
EMMA:  And relocate your entry-level employees.  Like, if you're in New York and you're only asking for people from New York and you won't relocate the kid from Iowa, then you can't hire that person as well.
LATOYA:  So from a hiring manager's perspective, I always like to be devil's advocate.  From a hiring manager's perspective, you have a show budget.  And the budget is $5,000.  You do all these things.  We don't have interns at the moment because we can't afford them.
EMMA:  And if you can't pay your interns, don't take interns.
LATOYA:  It doesn't mean that we don't have work to get done.  Okay, so we don't have $30,000 to pay with interns.  After you get through the processing fees and all that shit, it's $30,000.  Okay I don't have that money.  We sponsor a week in our newsroom and bring them in here?  Can we do a different structured fellowship?  What can we do with $300?  So we tend to look at the big money stuff, right, the things that are like, pay your interns, relocate people.  That's a really big, really hard thing to sit there and fight for at the hiring level where you're like, well your budget's already cut three times.  Figure this out.  But one of the things that I try to advocate for the people in my newsroom is, okay, general assembly said this.  Okay, it's $80.  To me, this is nothing.  To somebody that's just starting their career that's probably two days of work.  Let me see if I can sponsor somebody.  And you saw what happened with Hacker School.  If you want cover your living responses if suddenly, bam they're at 50% like nothing ever happened, right?  And that was $5,000 for each person from Etsy.  All right, so for them, small investment, but for other people, it made the whole world, so figuring out on a whole scale, what we can afford to do.  And I think also sharing resources.  And we're going to run out of time.  Sharing resources, internally.  I loved how we had the etherpad, do you need a ride share?  Do you need somewhere to stay?  Can we help this out?  Those of us who have means -- who needs help, and who needs can I commit?  I'm going to give somebody a 5,000-dollar scholarship but I'm like, you just need a hotel?  I'm going to help you out.  Let me go ahead and pay that for you.  It may be -- and being able to connect with folks who are at higher level in their careers where an expense of $200 is not going to make or break you.  Figuring out how to connect to that.
>> I was thinking about Tyler Fisher had a Tumblr called newsnerdsfirst.tumblr.com.  This was great kind of embracing and -- maybe we can do that for like nerds of color.
>> Two follow-ups.  It's one thing to meet people I know that a lot of people, myself included have even more trouble with developing and cultivating and keeping those relationships so that they can actually bear fruit and the second thing was when we were on that internship conversation, I'm not like, are there grants?  Are there third-party organizations that would be like, "Oh, we would love to?"  We have people with lots of money to put it in places where these people that you're talking about could get that payment for that internship.  So I mean, that's another thing that we may be need to do some.
>> Yeah and there are.
EMMA:  I mean, there's tons of money in the world.
>> And how do you just con people to do the things that you want to do?
LATOYA:  But actually building on that, I think that in terms of assessing your network right because what you're talking about like the W.K. Kellogg foundation, Ford Foundation.  They give tons of money out just trying to figure stuff out.  $35,000?  Here.  Just figure this out.
>> You gotta be in that circle.
LATOYA:  Yeah, you have to be in the circle.
>> We weren't even thinking that way and if we're trying to think of solutions and that was something they went to.
LATOYA:  So asking somebody to underwrite, or asking for favors.  We can figure shit out but if we need to be able to -- but that's the last question that we want to end on.
EMMA:  Anybody else or over?  Anybody else who hasn't said anything?  Go!  Go!  No?
LATOYA:  We're on Twitter.  We're on the Internet.  Find us, talk to us, go forth, change the world.  
