This is a DRAFT TRANSCRIPT from a live session at SRCCON 2014. This transcript should be considered provisional, and if you were in attendance (or spot an obvious error) we'd love your help fixing it. More information on SRCCON is available at http://srccon.org.

Captioning by the wonderful people of White Coat Captioning, LLC
whitecoatcaptioning.com



7/24/14
Session 3 -- Who are we missing? 
Session Leader: Mandy Brown

>> All right, I'm going to get started.  I think more people are going to trickle in, but since Dan told us to be on time, I'm going to adhere to that.  This is the short URL for a Google Doc which I started already, and if you would like to pop your name and like URL in there, I'm hoping to do a little SRC post about what comes out of this session and I will credit you as being a part of that if you put your name in there.  If you want to be anonymous, that's cool.  You don't have to put your name in there.  

I was going to make you guys take notes for me during this session, but it turns out we have an awesome stenographer over here named Norma, so we have professional notes, so you don't have do that, but David is going to pop in there and write down some kind of high-level themes and ideas that come out of this and you're free to contribute to that, as well.

Just in case you didn't remember from that whole big thing where we just introduced each other, but I am Mandy Brown, I'm from Brooklyn, I'm from Vox product.  Before Vox I was CEO of a little startup called Editorially, which is a collaborative editing platform which David built along with a few other people who are still here.  We sold that to Vox and are now working on similar tools inside Vox.  So I work on content management systems, basically.  But that I was a communications director, and that's kind of how I started doing product.  Before that I was in traditional book publishing and I will the cofounded a book apart.  I proposed this session because I want to know the apes to the questions that I put in there.  I do not actually know them.  

So I have a lot of questions, and I'm hoping that we -- like the people in this room have some ideas or even a way to like flesh out those questions, because I don't have the answers to any of these questions.  And partly, and I say this with a lot of my colleagues in this room, who I don't want to scare them, but one of the things that I have thought about over the last like five or six years is that I'm kind of always thinking about what my next job or career is going to be.  Not leaving my current one.  And I think that news room code and data journalism are fields which are welcoming to people of a lot of different backgrounds.  This is the kind of field that actually benefits from people coming from lots of different directions.  And I'm curious for myself how I might transition into something like that.  Whether or not I actually do that -- come on in.

Whether or not I actually do that is up to question, but one of the things that I thought about is that I'm interested in the stuff but I'm not really sure how to get started so there is a wealth of skills around presenting content on the web.  HTML and CSS are kind of stable states at this point in the field.  Javascript, Ruby on Rails, and various kinds of frameworks.  There's a set of tools and skillset around actually doing like statistical analysis, so things like Python and R -- please come in -- and also just basic competencies around like how do stats work and how do you look at data and know what to do with it, and there's probably all kinds of other things, I think, around kind of the power that comes along with that data, so the ethical considerations you have to take into account, like what kinds of things you could be revealing or not revealing what it says when you're acting on it, those kinds of things.  So I will put the question out to -- let's do this.  Who actually works in either newsroom code or data journalism.  I know at least one, two, three and a half -- what do you do?
>> I help run social strategy.
>> I work on the programmer side of newsroom.
>> OK.  Katie, also at MinnPost.  I lead our news application team and web development and design.
>> Tiff at New York Times.  I'm a developer.
>> So for the folks who are developers in the room, what do you think if someone was starting out going into newsroom code what are the first things someone needs to learn and what are the best ways to go about that.  First things that you need to learn?

>> Do you mean like what someone needs to learn to be a developer in the newsroom?  Or someone needs to know going into the newsroom?
>> Let's start with the first one.  So if you want to become a developer in a newsroom, how do you get started with that?  What are some of the core skills you need going into that experience?
>>
>> For me, I mean a lot of it obviously technical, like how to program, but the ability to work quickly and not be perfect in your work is kind of really important skill.
>> Kind of efficiency and lack of perfectionism.  Both really important.
>> I think there's a translation aspect, like translating what you're doing to people who might not understand or might not understand why it's important and not only translating it to other developers, but translating it to your newsroom.
>> So making sure the newsroom understands the importance of that development work?
>> Mm-hm.
>> Yeah, I think the more you can break down those silos, it will allow people to see into what the work actually looks like, and transition more people toward it.
>> Yeah, yup.
>> Kind of going off of that is to try to align goals as much as you you can between silos, so you're kind of working toward one goal.
>> So you guys say all that stuff I think about, like hybrids, like people who are not specialists in any particular area, but like it move around in a lot of things which is where I've kind of.  I've specialized in being a hybrid for most of my career for better or worse.  But I wonder if are there there areas of in depth experience where if someone wants to go to maybe a type of management roam into like actually working on it and I'll put this out as a really basic question.  Which programming skills do you think is most important right now?  I look at all the places I spend time working and it's ah, it's too much.
>> What are the things that like I ought to get into?  We can just make this session, "What should Mandy do next?" as a framing thing here.
>> Feel like that question comes up a lot, and it's always, it's sort of dependent on your project, and I think so first and foremost, what are you trying to do?  Are you trying to make a map that people can search for their home town and maybe you should learn this first or maybe some other things.  I always find that question just like insanely hard to answer.  I can tell you what I learned first in my like weird process, but that was because I needed it for this one graphic that I was doing or something like that.
>> But I think the ultimately the most important thing is learn whatever lets you do what project you're working on and if you've seen projects you like that are built in Javascript, then like sure, go learn that, and I don't know, I haven't come up with a better answer to that question.
>> So that argues for determining what kind of project you want to do first and then breaking down.
>> Yeah.
>> Keogh, who's actually here a book called "Don't Go Back To School," like a lot of people in that book talked about how they learned things and that's one of the things that turned up repeatedly is like I found a project and I figured out what that project needed.
>> Once you need one it's very easy to to find another.  I learned CSS because that's what I learned in high school.  I mainly code in Python now, because it was easy to make that transition.
>> I think just having some really basic knowledge of what type of code does what.  So you can kind of use that and either dive in more to get whatever project you need done.  I feel like everything is becoming very project-based.  And it's not like you said, there are like a million languages.  You learned two or three.  It's going to be less about a particular language, I think, but knowing the use of each language and being able to apply that.
>> Did most of you folks learn on the job?
>>
>> Lots of nodding heads.  Did anyone learn in school?  You learned C++   in school technically or half in school?  Do you think that's for someone who is, say, junior, who kind of wants to et head into this stuff that school is it a good path or would you argue for sending them straight into a job?  I see shaking heads.
>> So I should disclose I'm a professor, and we just hired Peggy, who's formerly a news developer who's teaching Javascript and stuff in our program.  And I have an approach.  When someone asks me what should I learn for coding it's almost like they've -- they've heard the message that I need to be a developer, if not, I will never have a job and that's a little bit of bullshit there and they're scared and they just are panicking, so it's not the right reason to answer that question.  So it's a tricky one to answer.
>> What's a better question.
>> What do you want to do for your life what do you have fun doing?  And you may or may not get paid for it and we'll get you where you want to be going.  Usually it's like I want to be an entrepreneur.  If you answer that question, you're not going to be an entrepreneur.  If you have gone through your programs and you haven't opened that book or you haven't had these conversations it's difficult to all of a sudden jump on that train and I have found that a lot of people are jumping on that train for the wrong reasons.
>> You have to really like to troubleshoot.  That to me is the most important skill.  That's the core skill that I try to instill in my students.  MacGuyver this shit.  I don't know what the fuck just happened, let's solve it.
>> Do you think that's an innate type of thing or do you think that particular habit of OK, something went wrong and I figure out how to do it is something you can teach if.
>> I think -- I would say it's a bit of both.
>> I think one of the problems is that we're even in this conversation we're starting in the middle.  Which language, blah blah blah, and everybody I've talked to at NICAR who aren't coders, they're like, which one do I start?  How do I even start, how does it go together?  And I think you need to start by explaining HTML, CSS, Javascript what do those do and the students I taught this year, as soon as I explained that, they were just like:  And I mean personally, you should start for programming language, Javascript is excellent because you don't need a big setup, you don't need Ruby on Rails installed.  You just do it in your browser and with that you work on the basics, variables, arrays, blah blah blah.  And all also right now, Python is great, Ruby on Rails.  All of those are just used for to get to the databases, but now that we're doing so much with json and flat files, Javascript is real is not only a great place to begin, but it's really the one that's going to take over.
>> I guess for me.
>> I'm not really kind of sure what position I'm in, because I'm very comfortable with code, but I really want to get into a research setting and like like knowing certain languages is well and good, I think it's the difficulty is figuring out where I'd be useful, where -- or like there are issues that I care about a lot, and stuff that I want to work on, but I don't know if I have to focus more on statistical kind of projects or more of an interactive thing, like --
>> Yeah, so the other side of this if I can interrupt for a second is there's one side OK I'm in or near a newsroom but I'm not coding and I want to get closer to the code.  The little bit of a perspective that I take to myself personally but the other side you're saying is I've got the code down and I get in the newsroom and I want to work on shit that matters.  Some of the folks are in the newsroom here.  There are like two sides of that, right?  There's the stuff that gets ticked out, like how to you build a website in using this stuff and presenting this stuff.  A lot of what we're doing at Vox is how do you present the news and the other side is how do you use programming to tell stories and in the sense of like digging through a database and figuring out where the story is in there.  I think the first part of that is I'm going to guess more familiar with that, in terms of how do you get things up in the internet, but the second part of that I think seems a little opaque or someone could argue with me about that, too.  Tiff, you do some of this stuff, right?  How does someone get into doing news with data?
>> I think a lot of our cases, only a handful of projects really are data analysis.  They tend to be identified as that early on.  It's like the ones where you need to put together a database or really spend a lot of time trolling through a lot of information.  The majority of the projects that we handle for the interactive graphics desk at the New York Times are really CNS hacking.  OK, you did this one interesting preparation on this one story that went up online, how do you get it there, and starting to accrue this weird library of all the little hacks and tweaks the CMS lets you do to get into just tweaking the story a little bit.  Once you have a library of a lot of those internal, I don't know, I guess it would be, you know, internal expertise in the CMS or whatever the system that your particular news operation runs, the questions are firstly how do I get this journalists will come to you you and say how do I get these things here, and then it's what if we want to customize it, and so the more of a library that you can have of those little edges of skills, the more you're in a conversation being like you have this cool piece that's coming up, you were telling me about this earlier, what if you were to do a little built of a custom, you know, adjust what the C column looks like or change the art that turns into a discussion with the journalists and gradually the teams that are doing that on a regular basis, they come and talk to you about stuff, too.  It's kind of a sideways answer.
>> Some of that comes down also to what's the best way to show this stuff, right, so you could have a table but there are lots of different ways to present that table that they are going to be more or less successful as a news story so a design coming into could potentially be really effective in that role.  You were raising your hand back there.
>> I don't remember what I was going to say but a lot of it has to do is latching onto people who know things that you don't regardless of your position.  So if you're in the newsroom and you're you know, I feel like I should learn code, it's usually not so much I should learn because that's what everyone is saying it's because knowing how HTML and Jworks opens up lots of story-telling possibilities and once you are conversant in this language you then have this whole new toolset, new ways of saying things to why you are audience, you don't have to write it, you have to know how to talk to people who can.  And knowing it is huge and I think that what at these types of conferences we don't hear much is the inverse.  Latch onto the old-school storytellers, like the writers, and learn sort of how narrative works and like sort of the beginning, middle and end, classic things, and like the two can really learn from each other, I think, but so much is collaboration.  At least that's in my experience.
>> Demystifying each other, as well.  Like demystifying technology and why does this photo run in color, we sold an ad on that page, not because it was more important, stuff like that.
>> Just to sort of play off of what you were saying as an old-school storyteller, I may be the only person here of dinosaur paper at the Daily News who works here as a columnist, and I think conversations like this are awesome, and clearly there's a lot of talent.  For myself, just sort of coming from one old school newspaper to another, the biggest frustration is knowing that there's so much talent out here and how do we get it into these shrinking papers with no budget and limited staff and all that and once they get in there, how do we break it down that this person is not coming for your job.  I don't have the answer.  But I keep coming to events like this, even though I feel oh, my God, I have no idea what people are talking are.  They're going to take my old lady card at the door.  But there's this opportunity, and I feel like inside our building and maybe outside, we haven't quite figured out how to meet in the middle.
>> Part of that friction that I see happening in newsrooms, too, is because there's these deadline pressures constantly, so there's never enough time, which then kind of, and there tends to be this trend of the developers in the newsrooms are way overworked and tasked, so they start to lose patience with excessive questions and rightfully so, because there's only so much you can do, but then it sort of creates this environment that, you know, is not welcoming for people to dip their toes in that or ask questions, so part of it is leads to like management's responsibility in, right, right, that's a largest issue.
>> That face was off the record.
>> [laughter]
>> I wonder if Claire could talk a little with working with some of the people in our now room who are not digital natives and not the most digitally savvy, because she works on a team of app developers.
>> I mean like we're sort of an experiment in that we're sort of like a content team of like basically we were a former multimedia team, which is like photo and video and we merged with what was the apps team which was developers and designers and so now we're this little hub that sort of consults with what we call subject matter experts which is I guess like our reporters, and we're basically like, we can't tell a story without your reporting, you guys tell us but they're like we can't build a site without you guys.  It's a very collaborative learn as you go type thing, but they're basically our subject matter experts is the terminology that we use.
>> And we don't make projects very often, because we can't.  And that's where we're at at the moment, but it's very sort of collaborative thing.
>> Is there anything I can do in my newsroom or other newsrooms, or anybody who's in the old school newsroom that we can sort of maybe make this happen more because the flip side of what you were talking about is that you have all these reporters who are totally on deadline being asked to do more with less, being asked to do more and more and more and we're told use some of that newfangled social stuff, and to be honest with you, I was 20 years at the Hartford Courant in Connecticut, and then I'm here our social media session ended with Twitter.  I kid you not.
>> I'll say one thing, which is that one of the things that I've done in previous jobs when you had people who were like overworked and weren't communicating, was I found a place for them to go eat dinner together outside of work, you buy everyone a meal.  Everyone likes free food.  You kind of break it down, some of those, any tension that might be around if you like put a plate of pasta in front of somebody, they're going to hang out until the end of that plate of pasta, at least.  You can initiate the conversation.  It does sound, at least from my perspective, that some of this is maybe kind of groundswell.
>> So in my newsroom I work with 500 to 600 people, most of whom are not digital natives, and part of my goal is to get them more ramped up on using these things, and the way that I've tried to do that is we have an internal listserv.  It's public.  Every day I write an internal note that praises people very publicly within our company for doing good things in digital and social, and that could be anywhere from like our 65-year-old film critic who took to Twitter to, you know, we noticed that people in the building were collaborating together and it's a very loose definition of what digital means.  When I first started it was opt in for everybody except management.  People started really liking being praised this way and they could share what they were doing and I could pass it back out to management, and then they, we don't necessarily use these things when we're like hiring people or when we're promoting people and I wanted them to think like this is important if so-and-so is doing this and it helped create this atmosphere at NPR were people are sharing more what they're doing.  If something works for one team, they tell me and I can tell everybody in the building.  But it's not just praising the people who know how to code and it's not just praising the reporters but if I notice somebody in development is doing something, everybody is on this listserv and we make the entire thing public so you can read it too.
>> and the other thing is you should be doing what you're doing right here, in terms of being with this.  And also hacks and hackers is literally a mix of old school news people and hackers and they have a pretty active chapter in New York, and I think in Philly, as well.  So it's definitely worth checking out.  I've been to some really good presentations there.  Al Shaw I think is one of the people who helps run the New York one.  And I think he's somewhere around here.
>> I've just.
>> We have one on the 30th on source cod rejects.
>> There's ONA, as well.
>> I actually know that.  So see, not that old.
>> It depends on what you want to --
>> I came from -- and my first career I worked in old school book publishing, I worked at WW Norton and company which is about as crotchety as book publishers get.  They edit on paper to this day.  And I got into web design partly like I started reading a list apart, to kind of lurking around in the comments there, and then I like submitted an essay to that place about like a little thing that I had something to say.  I went to meetups and things like that, to figure out how to teach myself HTML and CSS and those kinds of things.  Partly proactive.
>> You do it by yourself?
>> I think I had a couple -- I mean we're going back a long time here, so probably did get some nudges, but partly I think I was also just looking for I was like, I can't stay a print design er why, I'm not going to -- like I wanted a longer-lived career than that and web seemed like it was exciting and so I started going into that.  But it doesn't take much to build a small network.  Talk with and work with and hang out and make being connections with other people.
>> I know we're not supposed to take over.  I swear it will be the last one.
>> But you guys have mentioned this often about manage the as sort of as enthusiastic as I may be or other people are, I don't want to be Debbie Downer more than I already have, but this is a really small example, and it's kind of embarrassing, so it's not like I'm like newfangled stuff.  I went to management and, you know, that would be a really cool way for us to do some stories.  They're like, "Could we just wait until after the budget season?"  "This is not going to cost you money."
>> I mean the classic startup answer to that is you ask forgiveness later, don't ask permission up front.  Just do it.
>> I worked every digital job on the newspaper side and the lesson that I learned is go rogue respectfully, and a lesson I learned a long time ago is I forgot who coined the term, fool, be a present of the online.  So whatever side of the fence that you feel you're on, find an ally.  Let's not make this project be the project, but if it fails, no one even notices, but if it succeeds, you'll start building up that credibility.  What happens with management is they will block all your ideas but when an idea breaks through, all of a sudden they're all like that's a really good idea we had, wasn't it, so work from within, you plant those seeds and they'll blossom and grow.
>> Thanks, sorry.
>> I really like John Keefe at WNYC.  His story of how he became the head of this new digital apps kind of team was he just made a map right before hurricane, I guess it was hurricane Irene of the flood map area that existed as a PDF on the New York City government website and he made it interactive and that got more traffic than anything else that WNRC had seen, and they were like hey, this mapping internet stuff is it is really cool.  I'm at ProPublica, and something we've started is we have this brown bag sessions where we either bring people in or we have a little like here's how the web inspector works for everybody in the newsroom and that's like a lunch hour and because we do it often it's not a huge deal and people can come in and out and it's not super formal.  But it does get the kind of more technical skills and kind of people talking and sharing and good ideas and that kind much thing.  Noah V., when he was at the BBC, he did these little brown bags, and did that to the newsroom and they then asked him more questions and management is OK with you having like little lunch.
>  They may not even know about it necessarily, right.
>> It didn't cost them anything and you're basically doing the job that they should be doing, which is training and build willing moderate staff.
>> This isn't a solution, this is just an observation, watching the industry and the jobs that are going by.  The big players, you know, they have established web development teams and they're integrating.  There's been a flood over the last like 6 months of sort of next step down papers, or news organizations looking for developers, and data journalists and what I'm seeing is that they're confused about what they're asking for, so they put in the kitchen sink.  They want a data reporter, they want a developer, they want a dev ops guy.  You must understand HTML, TTS, you know, hypertechnical stuff, and that just doesn't exist, and then I can think of two of those jobs that were literally, you know, they couldn't find anybody, because that person doesn't exist, and then the job goes away, because if you couldn't fill it, then the management says it's useless, because, you know, we lived without it for nine months, what's there.  So as I said, this is not a solution, it's an observation of like, well, how do you get past that point?  Because if you don't also we're not keeping the flow of journalist developers going, and they're all at the New York Times, now, so you know, how do you get people in at the ground level if they're expected to be seasoned journalists who are going to work for $30,000, you know, out in, you know, Redlands, California.
>> You if I may, I think that's a really great point.  I think when you're listening to people downstairs in sort of the big hall there's definitely patterns emerging and those patterns are big blobby patterns, and I think we have the luxury because I'm taking the notes, there's a lot of this question of creating sort of alliances, acting on your own, working in small teams, if something comes to mind that it's not an option.  I want to be clear it's not an option for everybody to work on nights and weekends on side projects and things like that which to me traditionally have been very fulfilling.  If you have that luxury, if you have the personal time and space to do that, then you create these cool little sparks and splinters, which I think can then catch fire for small and mid level organizations as people determine what their passions are.  Like the things Mike the mid post I think are really fascinating because either a regional or a topical subject matter or a community subject matter that once you develop the skills and alliances to begin to fill in the blanks, you get an outward form from more monolithic teams, I hope.
>> I'm also thinking that basically the people in charge of writing these don't understand what -- writing these job descriptions don't understand what they're writing.  So but you can't, you know, pull it out from them and have somebody who actually does understand it because they're not high enough in the management or whatever.
>> So my thought to that, I came into journalism recently and I came from an engineering program.  My thought to that, you know, when you said that there aren't people that know all these things, well no, no, there are people who know all these things, they're in computer science programs in colleges around the country and I think as a computer science student that is graduating, sure you have a lot of options where you can get paid a lot or whatever, but like a lot of CS students are like sure, I can make twice as much at this company that manufactures nuts and bolts or I can make half as much working in something that I really feel is meaningful, and I feel like a lot of the students in my program had no idea that these opportunities existed so I think in terms of getting people that are really technically skilled, even if they have no journalism training, they'll be really excited to be in the newsroom and I think that's something not enough news organizations are looking at.
>> Well, that's part of my question of who are we missing, is there are people out there who don't know newsrooms are a career path and we have to get that in front of them in whatever way that takes.
>> I agree but what I was really pointing out is that they expect a data journalist who has car experience, literally I just saw this, you know, you knows how to -- it's like.
>> There's definitely some of --
>> Speaking of management in seeing the description in interviewing like the person who wrote that back in the day was like, must know how to write a headline, do CMS, and know flash.  This is a home page shift at night, why are you asking for flash?  They're like, we don't know what we'll get.  Maybe we'll get someone, and by osmosis, we'll get flash.  I think it's the same.  Just put it out there and see what you get, and it scares people.
>> Why aren't these places going to computer science schools in the universities in the towns where they are and say what isn't going on out there, let's partner in a project.  People in intro classes they're not being taught, you know, they're being taught how to code but they're not being taught to code in terms of like real-life projects.  If the daily news approached temple which has a new dean of the journalism school, and said we would like to work with the computer science department and we would like to work with these three classes and say to the professor this is what we'd like the students to build at the end of it, the students build something real, they learn useful skills, they get to meet journalists, they're put into the pipeline.  They might be more diverse than people in newsrooms.
>> I'm just curious, I don't know the answer to this question, but I mean are there efforts being made by newspapers to, like, open some of their projects up or parts of it?  I mean obviously you don't want to tell the story to reveal where you're going to be presenting, but you want to show some of it, or make people able to contribute to it?
>> I mean, I know the times has a lot of projects that are sitting on GitHub right now that are open.  I don't know what the licensing but you can see them at least and poke around with them and play with them.  Vox has been opening up a lot of their stuff, mostly like tools and making a lot of stuff like tiff was talking about.  They built up a bunch of stuff there.  I think any of the good newsrooms now, they at least have augite hub repo with a lot of stuff into in it.  It's work poking around in them and seeing what you can find or contributing to them.  And improve it, that's a good way to get the attention of the team.
>> Is it like a growing trend.
>> I think so.  Yeah, I mean I started at Vox four weeks ago and at their hack week, and the project that I ended up jumping into that in that was specifically about open sourcing things at Vox, because it's something that they always wanted to do, but hadn't done it, and they were getting a lot of pressure, partly from Dan Sinker, to getting around to actually doing it and I think the presence at this conference is that a lot of newsrooms are starting to think that at the very least it's a recruiting effort and I think that a lot of the things that they're doing if you build a tool to evaluate a particular kind of data, it's not proprietary necessarily to you, like you don't benefit at keeping that closed.  You're better off having people finding the bugs and fixing it for you.  Are local newspapers doing that a lot?  Maybe not, but the big nationals definitely are.
>> A lot of newspapers are open sourcing like tools and reusable sort of stuff, but like NPR actually open-sources their stories and we at min post have been open sourcing a lot of our stories for a long time.  We haven't really tried this or explored it, but like it would be hard to bring outside people on that process of making the story.  Like once it's published, it's easy just, you know, have it out there and let people do what they want with it, but I don't know of a process that to like get outside help.
>> I mean I've seen stories that are kind of crowdsourced data analysis kind of as the story was going on, you had tomorrow data that you needed so you opened up that part of it, I can't think an example right now but I know I've seen that a couple of times.  It is tough in terms of the presentation of a story that's not something that lends itself to have open source contributions necessarily.
>> I think sometimes it's a matter of documentation and thinking about documentation in a different way.  If you're writing code documentation is so that other coders can understand it, that's good, but if you've been writing code and opened it up to so other people can understand it, that's.  We have to think how to document this stuff externally and internally so it's not just coders who can understand the code.
>> Let me turn this around a bit.  We've talked a lot about coding skills and the way that work actually gets done, but we haven't talked about the other side of it which is like the kind of ethical questions that come into a lot of this stuff, which like I feel like a lot of people are also ill equipped for when they get into a newsroom, so if you didn't go to J school which I'm going to assume that most people in this room did not go to J school.  Did anyone go to J school?  Yeah, three, four. And not that there's anything wrong with J school, but I think a lot of people --
>> It's not required.
>> I think a lot of people in this field came from elsewhere and kind of moved in.  It's actually the thing I like about this area is there's a lot of diverse people from a lot of diverse backgrounds.  If you didn't go to J school how do you learn about the ethics and the politics that go -- and not to shit on FiveThirtyEight, because there's probably someone in here that works for them.  But they've done things with data that maybe weren't such a good idea in the last couple of months and Vox I think has had its not so great moments.  As someone who works for Vox now I can admit that.  I feel there's a certain path towards becoming literate HTML and CSS, I'm not sure that translates with the path to becoming ethical with.
>> I think that's where the buddy system comes in handy.  And like someone was saying before latch onto those people that you work with that have that experience and talk to them early in the process.  Don't wait until you've built something and then bring them a project and say hey, we built this, we did it and they're like you didn't ask this fundamental question or consider the ethics of publishing this and so keeping people who have this experience looped in early and learning from it often.
>> I think those meetups are the secret sauce to progressing forward in terms of if you're a developer and you want to get into the news industry, going to hacks hackers and being a regular there, you get over that awkward socialness and start to build a better relationship there and that's the better pipeline.  I wouldn't figure J schools to figure it out and it's not easy to collaborate, even in these institutions but if you can find like these moments -- we need more misfits.  We look at your title like who are you missing, we need more misfits who have overcome their imposter syndrome.  Giving a shit instead of just getting a paycheck.  How do we've appeal to those folks and diversify that.  The hackathons or at the meetups for either end of the group and the key there is for whoever is organizing that is that balance.  Because you've all been to these meetups where it's all idea people who've got their startup that's going to beat Facebook and one poor developer that are leaching on and it's just bad or the other extreme where they're doing extreme tech stuff that has no relevance to the real word but they've figured out this cool code.  Finding that balance and having that, you know, conferences like this, or news fu or spark camp. --
>> So if many I'm teaching myself Javascript and it's not doing the thing that I expect it to do or I'm getting an error, I can go look at that on stack overflow and find an answer quickly.  Is there an equivalent resource for ethical questions, for things around that.
>> I think as a developer who, like, found his way into news, I think one simple answer is just reading about the history of journalism.  I started reading this book called The Essentials of Journalism, and it sounds stupid, but like it explains the history of news and news ethics and all of the sort of problems that management encounters with news and conflicts of interest, and it was really enlightening for me.  And I think any developer who comes in from outside of news, you just hand him this book and say it's mandatory.
>> I think there's also a lot to say about watching publications.  I find some days I only read Times stuff, and I have to force myself read other publications in part to see what other data teams, you can see some programming stuff behind certain stories and see like oh, they thought to ask these questions, so if we ever wanted to do a piece about X or we graft it this way, and just like collecting in your head a library of what you thought was good and bad about how organizations approach a similar project for whatever you're kind of currently working on or formulating.  And then --
>> Audit the best practices that you can see.
>> Yeah and then figuring out also the culture of the different places like do you know that the team there is relatively new and therefore kind of scrappy about what they're up to or in the case of the times we've got a lot of Timesian culture and stuff behind what we do.  Would the Times do this project?  Would this smaller paper do this particular project?  Where does any concept sort of sit in terms of what a newsroom would want to approach?  And then getting in touch with other developers at meetups, saying why did you guys do it this way, what were the pitfalls, was there a gotcha behind that project that you guys didn't realize until after?  Just so sessions are so valuable.
>> I think also knowing the limits of your expertise, I don't know, like starting in a newsroom five years ago, working with like, you know, NPR vet reporters who are like experts at what they do, who maybe don't know the internet, they don't know what Twitter is and I'm awesome at the internet, but I like maybe suck at, you know, story telling and so it's like I can help you internet, but you have to help me know like what's good there.
>> and like learning as you go, and we did this big project a while back with the Planet Money guys, and it was this big internet hoopla project and there was a lot of resistance like oh, but the regular reporters they don't know what works in video story telling and actually they're really brilliant editors, so it's just like asking, which is at least in my experience, really important.
>> I think -- so I did go to J school, but I would say that the ethics class that we had was like the most horrible thing that I --
>> Everyone hates it.
>> Yeah, so I don't think like actually the only real difference that journalism school lets you do is you produce a lot of stories and then you get somebody to read them before they are published and then they can tell you like no, this is horrible, so you have a buffer before you put it out in the world.  So I think if you have a friend who's a journalist or a professor or somebody that just like another trustworthy person, giving them your project and being like hey, can you look this over, will catch like many, many, you know, problems that -- and getting that experience of like oh, no, actually I'm looking at the data wrong or I'm trying to make a point that is not backed up or I didn't adjust for population or all that stuff.
>> and you get a lot of feedback and then you do the revision, right?
>> Sure, it's back and forth for sure.
>> So that you will earn from your mistakes, right?
>> *.
>> But it's not necessarily, you don't get instilled some like, I don't know, totally new ethical, like feelings or, you know, by going to J school.  It's just that you have a little bit more of a buffer while you're learning and you have tomorrow training wheels, but I think the same thing applies here.
>> So good editors.
>> I agree with that and it's not only about learning from your own stories, like you have to go through other stories, as well, we have this assessing process for each student.  So it's a really rewarding process so you have to work through like several different stories before you graduate, so you already have that --
>> So if you're in a newsroom looking at how other stories are being developed.
>> Right, even though you didn't do that by yourself.
>> Oh, one more thing, this only applies to science journaIism is the Knight Science Journalism Tracker, is basically like an analysis of science news and I felt reading that was I learned more lessons about pitfalls and I think a lot of things in covering science stories apply to the data problems that we've seen.  There are tons of similarities there.  But reading more like critiques or at least like analysis like how this is covered catches many of those same like ethical or the things that you might not have thought of if you're coming from a different background.  So I like that.
>> Also suggesting some of what we were talking about at the beginning which is that it's kind of project based or subject based that if you're doing a story that's about science and you spend some extra time learning about the pitfalls there, versus something if you're using election data or something like that.  There might be cross-pollination things, but there's also specific things that you can learn about that you're doing a story about AIDS or something like that.
>> It used to be that you learn on the job and you just sort of like you were around it, you did calendar listings and you learned the who, what, when, where, why, and is that system just nonexistent now because print people, you know, old people don't want to engage with the online people or are the classic hard-core reporters, are they all gone, have they been all laid off?  How can that basically apprenticeship system no longer exists?
>> I don't know the answer to that question.  I can say in my own career, apprenticeship has not been available.  I had to kind of figure things out on my own.  I don't know if other folks who came up in newsrooms, if you had different experiences.
>> For me, that's why I went to J school and when I was there, someone taught me.  My first boss was actually a good boss and then after that, not so good, but yeah, it's not that -- that system is not --
>> and there is also lot more people applying for those jobs, so therefore -- or those, you know, data entry jobs for calendar listings, some of them are scripted and so it's easier to do and stuff like that.
>> I suspect -- and this is very anecdotal -- is the concept of apprenticeship kind of went away with pensions.  The idea of investing in an employee who's going to stick around 30 years -- when I started.  I was one of the last people to get in before they stopped pensions. I'll get like 20 bucks a month when I retire eventually, but started with one of the last publisher holdouts who still that had those kind of benefits.  As an employer, I'm going to invest a lot of money in you and you're going to stick around for a long time, I do think that I suspect that that's part of what's coming from there.  But also what I'm hearing from a lot of the things we've talked about in this room is there are lots of opportunities to find that apprenticeship on your own.  It might take a little more up-front work but there are communities you can participate in, there are people who you can find and kind of do work with, there are opportunities to kind of find that apprenticeship in the space that you're in, whether or not it is like sanctioned by management, you can like seek out mentors and collaborators within your space and that feels like potentially a productive alternative, like we can make our own apprenticeships if someone is not laying them out for us necessarily.
>> Our younger people in the newsroom less inclined from anybody's observation less inclined to seek experience from people who have been in the newsroom before?  Is that anecdotally the case, as well, in addition to maybe the other side of the equation where people are less willing to convey that information?  Are people more inclined to look on the internet or something like that?
>> My experience at news day is I'm hoping that will change but there's a huge cultural split, even though online and the paper were, you know, like 10 feet apart, they were -- they didn't associate -- you know, paper people hated the online, online hated the paper -- so it's, you know, hard to get over that rift to address these people who have had 20, 30 years experience because they don't want to associate and maybe online people, it's also like oh, those old print people.  So I think it's a cultural thing, maybe, you know, where it's hard to reach out.  Did that answer the question?
>> I think it depends on the job and the market that you're at, the organization that you're at.  I think younger up and coming aspiring journalists have more opportunities in nontraditional ways, like if you got into Twitter, all of a sudden you're the Social Media Senior Editor, which that just popped up, seniors in titles like candy or something like that.  But if you're a reporter, like breaking news reporter, you're a breaking news reporter, so let me go think or mentor with someone, that incentive is almost squashed out because of that deadline.  It depends on the organization.
>> I also kind of get the sense, like I know that both sides are sort of wedded to this narrative of like the old journalists are crusty and don't want anything to do with these new young journalists and the young journalists are too afraid or don't care what the older journalists, I kind of get the sense that for the old people who are in newsrooms now and for the young people who are coming in newsrooms, I mean there's a sense if you're sort of old school and still in a newsroom, you want to learn all these skills.  You want to have this collaborations so I don't think that narrative.
>> That was the narrative five years ago.
>> Yeah, and we're still sticking to that.  And I think the ones stick to go that are the managers, and the editors for some strange reason.  When we connect with each other, we in fact don't.  I see young journalists really wanting to talk to the veteran journalists about old-style storytelling, and I really hate that term, even though I call myself old and all that.  There is an opportunity where these two sides want to start working with each other but I'm not sure if they know how to do it when you have the leadership or the management not quite helping.
>> Do you think that's partially a factor -- this is something we see quite a bit too, where fewer people to do a broader and broader role and so they get so deadline driven on those projects, even if there is a culture and they have the impetus to want to do a wider variety of work, the sheer volume of work keeps enforcing that perspective.
>> And the reality is when you're not in New York Times or and you're like in the Daily News or the Hartford Courant, there's not the money.  I'm kind of wish there was a way for us to have the conversation at that level because we don't know what we want to do and we want to do it and we're stuck on Twitter and that's embarrassing.
>> That gets back to the job descriptions that want everything and they want to pay $40,000 in a city that --
>> That's pretty good these days.
>> It is, but that's, you know, did.
>> I'm going to pull back from that question a little bit.  I do want to ask one more question which is, so let's imagine that next year SRCCON is even bigger.  What kinds of people who maybe don't know about SRCCON do you think should be here?  One of those things I want to do is find where those people are and make sure they know about this and know about hackers and these communities.  It's easy for a lot of teams to be in a field and not knowing what's going on on the outside of it.  What kinds of people do you think we need, what are our newsrooms missing that, you know, could be productive if we found those people and brought them in here?
>> One point which is totally self-interested, but the audience development person tends to get or in many newsrooms is sort of pushed out of the development process, and that, I think those communities need to be interconnected more so that you're achieving the ultimate goal of reaching and expanding your community.
>> So audience development is one.  Everyone know what audience development is.
>> Or engagement or social media person or and not all of that, you know, Melody is a really great example, but like most social media editors, I know that's not exactly your title, but you know, they don't have coding skills of any kind.  They just are adept at the internet, and so kind of bridging that gap of skills.  
>> So you might have someone who's in PR right now and hating their life but they could do much better work.
>> Even though that PR knows a shit-ton of stuff that we don't even, they're smarter than we are, I just put that out there in terms of metrics and analysis.
>> They use data.
>> So we're going to invite PR people to the next SRCCON.
>> I would argue on that point that a lot of organizations are creating their own newsrooms.  Like Coca-Cola started writing their own press releases,.
>> They codified an innovation site.
>> They're basically doing what they're doing.  So I think we should take PR people really seriously.
>> the older editors in the Coca-Cola newsroom are not happy.
>> I latch onto misfits who -- like I think of Kinsey for example, the first time I've heard of Kinsey Wilson at NPR, I sat down with him and interviewed him and tried to find other managers that.  The thing with John Keefe, everyone uses him as an arc but he was the news director could he he could do whatever he wants.  But there are other people who are like I get it and I want to empower.  I think of Ken Sands who started off at the Spokesman Review with Ryan Pitts and he basically said dude, do what you do, and it was a great relationship there.  It was like those misfits that kind of get it and here's what I've found comfortable with what they don't know and are confident with what they do and are happy to share it.
>> I think another thing is kind of we underestimate how significant it is to pull someone in.  I think a lot of times we kind of like say there are all these resources, like you should just know that they exist and that should be enough, but I think kind of like trying to identify those people and it's a hard skill to kind of identify those not obvious traits.  I think as much as we can be cognizant to like not everyone that's doing good work is upon Twitter all the time because they can't be on Twitter all the time, to be honest and kind of not just basing it on those obvious metrics.  And then pulling them in.  I think there's a lot to be said about just direct connection and having that kind of support and link.
>>
>> Mel?  

Just bouncing off of that, the only reason I'm here at this conference is because Erin emailed me and said you should come to this conference and you should speak at the conference and I think, you know, figuring out who those people are and inviting them with an email message whether you're hiring or trying to find sources or trying to bring people into projects, it really does a lot just to you know, I believe in like praise and reaching out to people and bringing them directly in and that's how you diversify every part of this.
>>
>> Yeah, I back that up.  I was also an invitee, and, you know, I think that they did a great job of doing that, especially considering how quick it sold out and maybe there are some ways that they can tier the registration to kind of modeled off of what they did, I think they did a great job, but expanding on that forward.
>> Are there other folks besides like PR people or like engagement people who we think that the newsrooms?
>> Leadership.  

>>Leadership, you think?
>> Yeah, get some of the executives in the room to hear what's going on.
>> Those that get it.  Because it's like that has happened many times.
>> Combine it.  Get the ones who get it and get the ones don't, so that they see the power of the ones who don't.  The ones who get it is likely the ones who are succeeding if you bring like-minded people into the room.  If everybody's an engineer and you're trying to do fine arts, it's like you need some fine arts people in there.  I think it's the same principle.
>> Google Doc is going to stay up and stay public.  And we have a lovely transcript from our fan Norma, here.  If you put your name in this doc, I will follow up with it, because I'm going to try to write it up and pitch it to the source.  I might ask some follow-up questions.
>> You should all pitch to source.  That is part of the work being done in this room.  So yes, send me your shit:  ... ... ... ... ... 
[break]



