This is a DRAFT TRANSCRIPT from a live session at SRCCON 2014. This transcript should be considered provisional, and if you were in attendance (or spot an obvious error) we'd love your help fixing it. More information on SRCCON is available at http://srccon.org.

Captioning by the wonderful people of White Coat Captioning, LLC
whitecoatcaptioning.com       


SRCCON 2014 
           Session 18 7-24-14, 1630-1730
           Garden 1
           "Science vs. data journalism"
           Session leader(s): Noah Veltman
           --
           
NOAH:  Welcome, everyone.  All right.  So we're going to get started, I'm sure people will start to straggle in a little bit.  My name is Noah, for those who didn't know me.  I work for New York Public Radio.  I'm on the data news team.  So the name of the session is Data Journalism Versus Science, or Science Versus Data Journalism.  It's not meant to be like a wrestling match antagonism sort of thing.  My sort of inspiration for wanting to do this session started when I was talking at the Wilson Center, this place in D.C. for the science policy group and we got into it, a little bit on this subject much data journalism as kind of edging closer to science at least in appearance but often not in practice, not in form.  And I'm feeling increasingly sort of guilty about this sort of, subconscious about it.  Both in my work, or in others' work are sort of "sciencish" but don't actually have the rigor of real research science.  So I wanted to talk about it.  And I thought, so there's etherpad if you go to that link.  I have a lot of notes here but I did the want to put all that in there.  And I did not want to guide the discussion.  I wanted you guys to talk.  But I had these three kind of burning questions.  The first is, what are sort of the difference between sort of serious research science and data jury room as we tend to practice it.  And what are the similarities?  And out of that, are there things that we wish that we could move in one direction or the other.  Are there things that scientist do that we aspire to do more of, or value, or sort of adopt more fully from them, and from that wish list, how would we make that happen?  If we had pure view in the newsroom or something what would that actually look like?  How would that work, and jibe with business goals and actually get that done?  So that's kind of my plan.  So question one about what you see about the similarities and differences, I'm very messily going to scribe what you guys said, will she there's the first point that's the kudos norms, that this guy Robert Kimerton (phonetic) came up when trying to come up with what the this didn't of the scientific community are, and I think this was back in the 40s and the 50s.  It's commonalism -- but in this case, it's communalism.  Different sorts of politics in the sense that the things that you're doing are contributing to a shared body of knowledge.  So you make a scientific finding and it goes out into the world, you don't own it.  And it's shared knowledge.  U as in universalism.  It's not this prestood people that got to be called scientists, or the people at the top of universities who get to be so-called scientists.  D is disinterestedness.  That you're in it for the science, you're not in it to be famous.  Your goal for science, is science itself.  Originality.  You're striving for new knowledge, new information about the world that does not yet exist.  And S is skepticism.  Any finding, any claim deserves skepticism.  And it's only through that skepticism and that scrutiny that it becomes valid and sort of, more valuable and all those things sort of on the surface sound like values of journalists but I think there are just a lot of differences.  So what do you guys think?  Should I just go into my those?  Anyone have any --
>> I have a question.  Do you mean, like, "science" like physics or biology, or chemistry as opposed to social science or data science?
NOAH:  No, no.  It could be social science.  It could be data science.  Not necessarily hard sciences but I mean "science" in the sense of research science.  Something that you would have more in an academic setting where your goal is to produce some new specific new piece of knowledge about the world and work through normal scientific processes to get there.
>> Um, so I'm not actually very familiar with either field, but I know that at Mozilla, we recently started a project called the Mozilla Science Lab where, from everything that I have read about, and talked -- I have read about, and talked to the head about it, apparently, to the science world.  That's actually, like, this funky ideal that just like reading from that ideal, you think like, all scientists are open-source people or something like that.  But in fact, partly because of the way incentives are structured, they often will horde all of their information, and not release nifty before publishing because publishing is like this big, that's what actually gets you credit and able to move forward in your career, or stay in your career, or whatever.  And so it's not like it's not like they're, like, they have, like, get repo, and they are publishing all or the results as they're doing their research and clashing with each other.  In a lot of ways, it's actually very closed, and that's part of what the science lab is trying to do, is to try to make them work in a more open-sourcey way but that was interesting to me because I was always like yeah, scientists, it just sounds like open-source is just what they would be raised in, or something like that.
NOAH:  Okay, so you think -- which column would you even put that the, you think, sort of lack of openness, or lack of collaboration?  Sort of both?
>> It seems that they are both heterogeneous in that, there's like a growing community in both that is trying to do things in a very open, rigorous, peer-reviewed kind of way but definitely in science, I think that Caitlin, head of the Mozilla Science Lab was saying that only about 2% of all researchers, or something actually, um, work in this sort of open kind of way.  It's just like a very small percentage and I have no idea what it is in journalism.
>> A related question.
NOAH:  Yeah?
>> For the purpose of -- my question was going to be, like, for the purpose of this discussion and for, like, simplicity, are we thinking of, like, comparing ourselves, comparing journalism as idealized sciences as presented here or leaving the nitty-gritty of what science is actually doing to another conversation or should we be roll?
NOAH:  Yes, there's a lot of potential.  I mean we can probably spend an hour arguing over the definition of, "Science."  But I think we can too a little of both.  I think maybe it's more started to focus on ideals, right, on values and norms that people aspire to, maybe 'cause the question of, like -- and I put at the bottom of the ether pad, questions we won't get to, and we'll get to this, how scientists don't live up to their own norms and that it's probably a whole session for itself.
>> The whole column, science is slow and for journalism, it's fast.
>> I think it's -- are we raising hands or am I just talking?
NOAH:  You can just talk, Ben.  You can always talk.
>> I think sort of just jumping off of the open-source analogy, it's interesting to think of the sort of the metaphor of forking in journalism versus science where, at least to a degree in science, there's in a given field there's, like, an universal, established literature, and there's this ongoing conversation where, like, a new paper will be a follow-up, or an experiment in new circumstances or a direct refutation, but, like, it's this ongoing -- everyone is aware of each other, at least in -- especially if the field is smaller where there's nothing wrong in journalism to outlets producing identical, especially, content but maybe -- essentially content but maybe they thought of the front-end visualization differently.
NOAH:  Sort of like duplicating?
>> Versus --
NOAH:  Versus having a cannon, one thing kind of like --
>> And then -- well, I don't have an "and then" yet but it's interesting.
>> I wondering if a way of thinking about it, for as slow as science is, there's actually more of an import on publishing first in science than in journalism.  There is a big emphasis on publishing first in journalism but if you publish second or third, you can still be useful.
NOAH:  Sure.
>> And science, you won't even get published second or third because no longer an use to having that paper in the world.
>> I also thought it was a big issue with uncertainty -- there was a big issue with uncertainty.  I guess, again goes back to what you were saying whether they live up to their own ideals but ideally, science embraces uncertainty to a greater degree than journalism does because there's qualify indications that comes out whereas journalism they want to present a simple and understandable view of the world, which might not be the case.  But if you have a five paragraph on methodology, no one's going to read it.
>> And in science, this philosopher of science named Feyerabend talked about how science is kind of founded on these Copernican terms; not a linear march or consensus.  Not because both don't depend on and aren't beholding to fact but because, the kind of healthiest scientific environment is one in which someone can say, well, what if it does revolve around the sun or something like that?  At any time, the foundations can be shaken to such a degree that whole new fields can -- can spring up.  It would be something very strange would happen in journalism -- I mean, I'm not saying that we've never been lied to or found out new information after the fact.  Sure that's what journalism does.  Every time there's a big smoking gun, our foundations of the world are shaken a little bit.  So in a certain way they are close but also, the core principles or something like that in journalism can't -- aren't subject to change in the same way that science is, at least in kind of an ideal sense.
NOAH:  So like, maybe messier road to progress for science or more unstable, everything is always in dispute.  Everything is always up for skepticism?  How would you phrase that?
>> I don't know, I mean, 'cause that sounds good.  I mean, I really like what the person before me said about how -- I forget exactly the words that were used -- but I thought it kind of captured that spirit nicely about how in journalism there's -- you want to be more guarded, you're a little more cagey about your certainty because it's not all right to be like, "Oops."
NOAH:  And it's not a great story to say, "We may be found out this but we're not sure."
>> Yeah.
>> One kind of infrastructural thing that ties this together is because of publishing through journals there's a very set way of referencing previous work that you're building on, or responding to, or sort of mentioning.  And I mean, a lot of stories do, in their text kind of mention related developments but there isn't -- there's no -- it's not codified.  So you can't look it it in kind of the abstract.  There's to easy way to take an article and say, like, let's look at what this is based on methodologically, and what is this building on theorems of the body -- has this building on in terms of the body effects.
NOAH:  Yes, and there's a certain competitive angle there, about the willingness to talk about, "Oh, here's all the good stories that people have talked about on this topic."
>> If somebody is attributing somebody else, it means that they think it might not necessarily be true.
>> And in science there's sort of this emphasis on method -- was part of science you come from.  There's an agreement that we have sort of experiments and we have hypotheses and the method is very established, whereas the end product might be vastly different and in journalism.  Whatever method you get, and even in this conference there are people who do the same thing like ten different ways but we more agree on like the end product -- oh, you know, it's for public interest or communicating information, but there is little method to journalism in the same kind of systematic way.
>> I was going to say diversity of methods?
>> There's not the experimental method but there is sort of like getting quotes from a certain set of people.  I think it's, I don't know.  Heuristics and the methods are probably --
NOAH:  In journalism, the methods are more established for classic, narrative journalism that's been around longer.
>> Sure than for new stuff.
>> I also think there's also kind of a different way of reasoning about things.  Journalism is kind of deductive logic A which directly proves B, which proves C.  Whereas in science you see more of an inductive model, where I have 95% confidence that A implies B, and sometimes you see what's called abductive reasoning:  I have B and I'm going to say A is a result because I have the observation B and that's like a whole different thing.  And sometimes you find journalism that has, like, statistics in it, but we're really uncomfortable, in general, kind of thinking in this kind of inductive or abductive way that science is a lot more comfortable with.
>> I mean, to go along with that a lot of science is like, presumed A, we can say this with some certainty but it's not necessarily -- it's very rare that you see a piece of journalism that says, working from the premise that the government wouldn't actively be trying to be screwing over its citizens and it's like well no, that's not an acceptable way to kind of journal.
>> For a quick one, science has a peer review prior to publication and journalism you have a freedom to choose your subject matter -- your choice of subject matter is free from external identities like granting bodies.  You can just do what you and your staff want to do, your editor, or whoever.
>> Another topic, I don't know if that's relevant but can we also compare phoning and the supporting part of journalism because I know scientists have regular donors.  It's kind of how it works in our case, where their donors would like to see their outcome.  But we as journalists, we have crowdsourcing right now.  But I don't know if that's another direction.
NOAH:  Absolutely, the funding, that issue of grant-making and is what scientists need to do in order to, you know, pay the bills and have their work funded.  Not that journalism all has the same business model but certainly different.
>> I feel they have very different approaches to ethics.  Science has come up with ethical frameworks for doing experiments whereas in journalism it's thought more of as the limits of what you can get away with rather than anything.  You very rarely hear people discuss ethics when they're talking about journalism, even beta journalism.
>> I think slightly different audiences is a big thing.  And running with that, slightly different missions.  I think historically, journalism is a little more civic oriented, at least historically.  And I think that whereas, you know, with the scientists -- scientific journals you have sort of a ludry (phonetic) of a community who knows what you're talking about but in journalism, historically, the mission is to translate what the scientist is doing to the wider public.
NOAH:  And that goes back to the originality question.  Sometimes it's enough to take something that people already know and help people understand it.
>> Journalism -- it has to be interesting.  I mean, people need to want to read it, and there's a lot of really important science that nobody cares.  I mean, no, there really is it's not a break-radio through.  It's just expanding a data set.  Skew I would say that's not although true.  It could be both it's really hard to publish null hypotheses in science because there's this idea that what you come up with has don't be novel horde to move forward.
>> Well, I think there are important scientific papers with intermediary results.  Like a protein structure, someone later is going to develop the drug.  Maybe there's a science/engineering divide.
>> But if they don't.
>> But I think it's the audience again, who's it interesting to.
>> I think we only read third of the stories published.  Screw but that's the mission, right?  The goal is for people.
>> Well for something like the paper of record.  There's all this, you know, we have to publish the intermediary results of, like, oh, you know, we talked to somebody and he has no comment, or something like, you know?  Ask I don't know, for better or worse, probably worse.  Screw I think the shared part is that someone always does care.  There's one person who cares about every single.
>> Sure.
>> Scientific publishing, even if it is about one person -- and the same is true, if you're covering this block in this city in this county changing to single assortment recycling, they are fighting, they will get it in.  And they will fight to get coverage for it, and they will fight --
NOAH:  I put this in the shared column of intermediary results.  It looks like there are some different views on this.  The null hypothesis issue but this question of publication bias which may sort of apply to both.  It may be hard to get your paper published that's not saying anything interesting similarly if you look at a data set many a newsroom and the answer is, nothing was interesting -- that's --
>> We face the same problem, though because it's like prosecute better or worse, you know, a writer's kind of gold star, or whatever is, they want a story, right?  And that's not going to change for a while, at least.  Or you know, depending on what publication, maybe it's the hundredth retweet, or whatever about a story, right?  But there is a degree where you're disincentivized trauma publishing an important but you know, not very buzzy result or something because, you know, people want the smoking gun.  People want, "Conclusive corruption after all."
NOAH:  I saw some more hands.
>> Just sort of on the methodology and the secrecy thing.  I think in science there is, like, sort of an obligation to show your work just later that you have to explain how you did things so that somebody else can reproduce it in a way that I don't think is much the case in journalism.
>> In science, there's also a direct incentive not to publish your failed experiments because you don't want anybody to know what you're trying.
NOAH:  Sure, do you think that applies in journalism as well?
>> Like like, you wouldn't publish a half of a story, if you decide to scrap it, or if it's not going anywhere.  But I don't think it's for the same reason, though.  You're not worried about that somebody else is going to put together something like that many.  You're just worried that it sucks, right?
>> Looks like there's no corruption, after all.
>> Surprise, it was puppies!
>> I went to a science conference last fall.  It was an imitational conference for young experimental scientists and I just spent two days straight trying to get people to cross-fertilize with each other and this is because science are apparently even-sided from each other.  And they don't even have the same specialized terminology from one field to the next.  And I just found that from meeting with them and talking with them, I was really amazed how really non-individualistic they were.  They had one idea of a career path, and if you deviate from that, you're ex-communicated and journalists are really seen themselves in a way that's really different from scientists, and the language is so specialized, the language is so chronically specialized in scientist.
>> A lot of scientists lament not being able to talk to each other.  There's two mama technicians if you give the ten view of what they do, an algebraically geometric, and but they can't talk to each other.  They might be studying the savoring and they don't even have the same words for it.  It becomes this tower of babble.  And, I don't know.
>> That's true.  At least since where ostensibly writing for sort of a common audience, like, you know, like a less specialized audience in journalism, there's at least more opportunity for intercommunication, some more mingling just 'cause we at least still have some ground in a common language, if not audience.
NOAH:  And the question of expert audience versus an audience for laypeople.  It's also this, how interesting is it to drone on and on about methodology.  If you paper a scientific paper and you can assume expertise, and they will talk about methods and go into detail about what they did but maybe there's less of an appetite about that with a data journalism piece where they want to get to the findings, the interesting part, and they don't want to hear about the five pages of here's all the stuff that you did with this cool data.
>> Shove it off into the nerd box at the bottom of the page, or something like that.
>> I think the whole point of this conference was to avoid this stag Nancy.  Where there's not room for innovation.  I think there's more of that in journalism.
>> Journalists and scientists are both supposed to be correct and precise in public and if they make a mistake, it's bad and it's visible for the rest of forever.
NOAH:  So on that visible on the rest of forever, do you think there's a difference in shelf life of a mistake that, say makes it into a scientific journal versus an article that's meant to be published and read and maybe not get a lot of audience after that?  Or do you think that's kind of similar, or both?
>> I think it probably comes out in the wash because, you know, it's kind of like a huger audience.  So there's a lot of noise in journalism.  You know, just speaking -- in signal terms whereas, you know, if you have this narrow focus of research.  You know, if I'm looking at a specific gene doing whatever, whatever, all the people who follow in those foot footsteps are going to follow longer.
>> I mean, it seems and it gets to the publishing the wrong information, the two ways the field -- this may be really obvious, the two ways the fields conceive the world is different.  Science is about rational, like, empirical experimental process toward universal static laws and journalism is all about the case and about following, you know, even when it's data, it's about this case.  So when science gets something wrong in public, that error may last forever but it's a methodological error and so people understand it as a methodological error.  That this guy isn't there in journalism yet.  We don't -- because we don't conceive of it as we're getting toward the "err" answer for whatever it is, kidnappings in Nigeria.
NOAH:  So it's different audience expectations, right?
>> And different ways of conceiving knowledge.  I don't know, it might be interesting to look at science journalists where the two have already intermingled for a while, in that how scientists have figured out how to state scientific findings in ways, responsible and irresponsible for journalistic audiences.
>> And people respect sciences scientists and they don't respect journalists.
NOAH:  So scientists get more of the benefit of the doubt?
>> I think that's more of a reflection of what you're saying, though.  Whenever there's a public trust index, or whatever.  The journalists, and politician, and rapists, scientists are routinely held up to be, you know, paragons of exactly what you're saying.
>> Well, if science is so respectable, then you should put that journalists are cool.
>> Depends on who's funding the scientists.  'Cause if they're being funded by, like, the major oil companies and they're trying to tell you that global warming doesn't exist.
>> Is that different from who funds mainstream journalism, though.
>> From the fact that large corporations fund their publications?
>> No, you're right.
>> I was whale going to say that trust would be in both columns, ideally.  The ideal of science and journalism is that the public trusts both, but in both cases I don't know if that ideal is realized.
>> I think people are more aware of the discrepancy in the case of journalism than in the case of science, maybe.
>> I don't know how much time science spends thinking about how much the public trusts them.
>> Does it matter?
NOAH:  You think the public is not so much their constituency?
>> Yeah.
>> To that end, I wonder how much journalism is any more, than the last 20, 25 careers is parroting sources, going back to the journalism thing, whereas science is more of the end result if that Massachusetts.  Journalism is hey this knowledge exists trauma this public official, or some study they did and I'm just going to regurgitate.
>> But that's the top level science.  For hundred of those.  There's undergrads, well this person's doing an experiment, you can help them.
>> Or like in journalism the ideal of objectivity is actually a crutch because what that actually means is that you're being balanced and have been you've interviewed someone on this side and that side, and your objective, and unbiased but I think that word is really dangerous and scientists have a different understanding of what is objective than we do.
>> I think we've been only considering the more empirical science.  Let's not forget about qualitative which is more of the gray area, I think between science and journalism when it comes to ethnography.
>> Sort of like trolling.
>> Which is what you started with.  With doing data journalism that, making it look "science-y" and, you know, whether that kind of journalism is different than the things that we have been talking about, you know, is different than peer journalism.
>> Um, is it worth saying that, um, the public's perception of science is changing to be more like the perception of journalism?  I'm thinking specifically of there's, like, companies -- lots of times PR agencies or marketing firms will actually pay to have a study done for some -- for some clients that are drug companies, or whatever to -- and like, yeah, there's like a feature on -- it was on the media, or like on some podcast about this about how scientist will regularly get contacted to do -- to do some sort of study just so they can have a sound bite in an ad for it, or something like that.  And it makes me think of the way that the public react to movie reviews.  Scientists are effectively drug reviewers.
>> Their version of native advertising?
>> I actually don't know what native advertising it is -- oh, the things that are supposed to appear as news stories but are ads?
NOAH:  Public trust in an ideal that they're falling short of these apparent conflicts?
>> But yeah, this is a huge problem in health care.  Your doctor taking pharmaceutical money and taking fees.  And lo and behold, that's the drug they're giving to all patients but I think more people trust their doctor on any of these surveys more than -- but suddenly that's also, people finding out more and more that, oh, well, there are reasons that they're prescribing you this thing, or that thing and that's sort of crumbling that trust.
>> There's still a difference, though between science where we started, and shit scientists do, and journalism, and, like, shit journalists write, so we have to be careful about which ones we're actually talking about.
NOAH:  What about the question of where data comes from for findings.  Scientists being more comfortable designing their own experiments and getting new data new certain way as opposed to often, inheriting data, you know?  Sometimes from antagonistic parties, from governmental agencies and things like that.  Do you think that's a difference, or do you think that's exactly the...?
>> Well, the scientists can't source them as honest sources.  Nominates sources -- anonymous sources.
>> Well, this goes without saying, that I think journalism is loose that if you write some super, breaking story, or some viral content that it's going to show up on every news site just with a new lead, or reaching around a little bit.  Or you'll get full daily mail and they'll rip your whole story.  I wouldn't imagine in science the blatant taking of one another's stuff wouldn't be quite as accepted.
>> Well, but that's how science was founded, right?  There's a whole history of mathematicians, like, literally shooting each other to death in the 1600s because they would steal each other's algebra and stuff.
>> Could we have a people column?  Just do this to each other.
>> That goes in the middle yeah, that definitely, definitely happens.
>> Don't journalists do that?
>> Oh, journalists don't have the same kind of popularized, people don't have a general awareness of journalists' processes the way you can talk about shoot-outs between mathematicians in the 1600s.
>> Just get more journalists to shoot each other.
>> There's stories that I remember, like the one about This American Life episode where they talked to a guy who was, like, knew something about apple and I never actually listened to the episode but they had coverage about how they totally broke and this was this weird thing.  Like is This American Life journalistic enterprise?  And did they rake with ethics by not checking this guy's sources and writing whatever he said, or whatever?  It seems like journalists do have a high responsibility, I mean like, and -- and the civic goals type stuff, public perception of journalists, civic goals is, makes them have that sort of -- what was the original question?
>> Should we shoot each other?
>> Yes!
>> There are high ideals in journalism but I think the public perception is that they're rarely seen and I think what made that episode so interesting when they did the let's visit the Mike Daisy Apple story because you rarely read for an hour, a news organization saying, we fucked up, and really trying to figure out how and all that.
>> It seems like the apparatus of science is distilling what can truly be said.  So what can we say.  And not just in the hard sciences, in the social science.  Journalism isn't that.  When we have -- and when there are boners, like data journalism boners, like, mistakes, that's a problem.
>> Like what?
>> Mistakes!  Mistakes!  Sorry!
>> Example?
>> Um...
>> That should mean something, though.
>> I'm actually not too familiar with how this works in science but one thing that comes to mind is, are the legal ramifications of making mistakes?  Are there legal ramifications of making mistakes and most media organizations, I assume have some kind of lawyer on retainer.  I mean, where I work at Mother Jones, there's always a sensitivity toward, is this going to get us sued?  And I would wonder what the thought process is besides your entire academic career being ruined and your peers no longer respecting you but could you actually go to jail or, you know, incur some kind of real cost?
>> Can you slander a molecule?
>> To speak to that -- I think there's a --
>> I think if your findings are used in some way and you were found to nothingly do false things.  Scientists go up to Congress and, like, you know, are witnesses in things and, you know, they're lying or...
>> But Congress goes up to Congress.
>> True, but there is a sense of, I mean, if you're misrepresenting facts and that injuries someone in some way.  Not necessarily defamation in take that we worry about in journalism but at least negligence.
>> Right.
>> But with the Wakefield case with the vaccination?  I guess that he was tried in the UK.
>> But that's like a standard of fraud, right?
>> Sure.
>> Like, being wrong is supposed to be a part of science.  You're supposed to be allowed to do that, and I feel like you're protected for being innocently wrong when you're doing science but if you're doing introduced, that's something totally different but a journalist can be innocently wrong and someone could be like, your stupid mistake hurt me, pay me.
>> Wasn't there some issue in Italy with these you think these geologists that were either -- I forget whether it was a criminal thing, or something where they hadn't predicted an earthquake or something and they actually did seek legal ramifications.
>> They were sued and the reason that we heard about it was because it was so ludicrous and unprecedented that a scientist would be sued and someone trying to take action on it.  Fluke?  No.  The legal stuff is going to be different in each.
NOAH:  The legal stuff is going to be different in each cultural context but one thing off of that is are journalists more likely to have enemies from what they're doing.  Are they more likely picking a human fight as opposed to disinterestedly pursuing knowledge?
>> That's entirely true.  People make entire careers of being an enemy of someone else's career.  I'm an adversary for your organization.
>> There was a story in the New Yorker that someone did for like chemical company and like the chemical company wanted him to analyze a fertilize or whatever and he started getting findings that were -- where it was, you know, it turned out that the fertilize was actually doing plaintiff smarm the company -- was doing a lot of harm and the company tried to get him to quiet down and then he started acting like a paranoid person, that people under following him around, but it turned out that it was true and that they were following him around, and stuff.  But that was a New Yorker story.  I don't know what the commonality of that is.
>> Think about the guys who discovered cold fusion, or thought they had.  How difficult their lives must be now even though now they were made straightforward, they weren't committing fraud, everyone just laughs at them now.  So it does happen occasionally that if you mess up in a big way your career could be over skew and then there's that ongoing Dr. Oz ways where he was telling his audience members to take all these vitamins and their benefits weren't proven and he was brought before a congressional panel, and, like, interrogated about this, but I don't know if, like, aside from that hurting his reputation what other -- like if legally he could be held accountable in any way.
>> It's funny that on a couple of different threads, much of the examples of in subjects that we were citing have been journalistic coverage of scientists and whenever we cite about this or that, we're seeing a really small slice of the total scientific community and in general, outliers because outliers make news.
>> And this is a problem, at least for the scientific community and I would even go as far as to say for the humanities.  Most people have almost absolutely no access to them.  Every journal ask locked behind these proprietary, university-only subscriptions that you to pay thousands of dollars a year for.  There's been no attempt to kind of normalize the vocabulary such that anyone could, you know, pick this up.  I like matte, you know, I study math but still any of the new breaking path I can't read a sentence of it, do you know what I mean?  And this is a hard thing for, and granted we obviously won't be able to stay on the van guard of these kinds of, you know, scientific endeavors but because it's so poorly publishized from within their group it's much more difficult for people like everyone here, or everyone -- we're outliers.  People -- our readers to know what's going on other than when we cover it and we only cover it when it's something sensational like geologists prosecuted or like, you know, do babies have nuclear fusion, or something like that?
>> I think there's no incentive for that to happen because it's like a closed-loop system.
>> But isn't that sort of the ideal and the hope of journalism, is that it's kind of the best of these two worlds coming together in the way that Dr. Oz is the worst of the two worlds coming together, creative journalism is like, you have the power of like, being able to think through something thoroughly, and being able to deset me mate it widely, instead of having people have this publish accessible.
>> The fundamental between between scientists and journalists is that scientists are makers.  And journalists are the reporters but data scientists --
>> Sort of on that note, there, I feel more so historically in the sciences but now potentially in journalism, there's more of a potential -- more potential hazards, like physical hazards in the process of making and researching these things like in the case of sciences, you might be dealing with hazardous materials and God help you if they leak and on the journalism side, now we're dealing with people trying to take video via drones slash flying upside down lawnmowers that could potentially crash into people and cause a very bad day.  So, it'll be interesting as some of our methods get more technically interesting, how, like, the liabilities and training requirements of those go 'cause like in labs, I had to sit through plenty of hazmat classes.  Like hey, don't do this with the acid, k, thanks, bye.
NOAH:  So there's an educational requirement, there's not the same barrier of becoming a working, recognized journalist than there is to becoming a lab scientist.
>> And that's becoming the other way, which is weird when you think about it.
>> Journalists, for human subjects don't need consent and scientists do.
>> Sort of building on the concept of liability, you know, it's possible in science to be a part of a volume of work that can be ensurable as a concept and then you have like, subsequent work, at some point people say legally this is something that I can actually negotiate, some sort of protection around.  There isn't that same sort of protection in a volume of work for journalism where you have a series of stories or something like that where someone is willing to say this is enough of a product that penal are going to bat for that legally, or otherwise.  The concept that journalism isn't ensurable is interesting if you're talking about the lines of corporate research.
NOAH:  We have 14 minutes left.  You were talking about how data journalism is potentially supposed to represent this kind of, merger of these two, of the best of both, a little bit.  I think that's a very good segue to possibly spend the next ten or 15 minutes which is talking about.  Can we identify these differences?  Is there a wishlist?  Is there a list that we could possibly take from this side, as data journalists, as working journalists, where we can more proudly, and authentically wear scientist hats.  Rather than the illusion of...
>> Well, I think the questions of these reliability and professional responsibility it seems like maybe we're aiming more in a direction of engineering than science 'cause if you're a scientist there's a sense that, like, you follow the process, you do things right and you hope for the best and that sort of protects you, whereas if you're engineering, you need to take into account that you're actually doing things that will affect people, directly.  And the same questions seem to sort of be raised in journalism when you're asserting things about the world in a way that journalists do.
>> Is there any worry that data journalism could be the worst of both worlds and what I mean is that, you know, it all depends on which way we can combine these things, right?  Because in one sense we say that journalism is faster and there's like, you know, less embracement of uncertainty and things sort of moving like a linear progress and people read it, kind of -- it has, like, an agenda ask all these kind of things that we talk about in Swedish House Mafia.  The thing that I worry about with data journalism is yes, we often catch handicaps in the Nigerian kidnapping but the people that are catching them.  And the people that are aware of the corrections and redactions, are people like us.  The people in the Nieman lab, not like my parents, the people I grew up with, right?  But they might see the original headline, they might see the incorrect statement, they might see the skewed data set that didn't come out of malice, or negligence as much as simple handicaps, or bugs, or whatever.  Whereas in science, it's kind of insulated against that because you've got a peer review, you've got a provides that's lightyears away from actually -- I don't say that scientific mistakes don't hurt people, but it's lightkeys away from the beginning of the work drastically hurting somebody.  Whereas in journalism, the first stab at a graph or a map could mess things up.  You don't have that sense skepticism, or the peer reviewing, that mulling over, that insulation.
NOAH:  So would you say that possibly you wish that data journalists had sort of a professional standard or some fraction of something that does a little bit of peer review that was a little bit more proactive, a means of catching things before they're out in the public.
>> But then you lose feed, you lose kind of the way we work.  'Cause we get a story, and hey, I need it in eight hours.  We don't have enough time, oh, can we pass it by the data science word, someone with a -- under with an Excel sheet saying, yes, yes, yes, that looks correct.
>> But this is also why we have editors.  That's the role.  Just wish we had better editors.
>> I think the quality of editors is even they will ever the problem, it's the fact that data journalism, being this new and shiny thing has somehow bypassed in edit y'all rose, it certainly has in the place that I I work.  And maybe it's just the organizations that we work for don't fully understand the risks inherent in some things that we're talked about.
NOAH:  And I think only now are some places starting to hire data editors, people that are meant to fulfill that role, specifically for those projects.  Propel has a very fortunate data-minded editor.
>> I would like to see the citation list.  It would be very difficult and it would be a rabbit hole in journalism.
>> We have links!
>> Oh, yeah!
>> We use links all the time.
NOAH:  So that's another question about the system, not a question about the system but maybe the culture.
>> They're not real links, I mean, they're...
>> Even scientific studies that, you know, just recite each other and recycle, like, the same stat.  After a while, it's hard to track down exactly where it came from.
NOAH:  Your hand's up.
>> I like links, but the problem is links die because after a career, suddenly that link's broken.  There's this old site on New York Times that's called hyper wocky from annoyances, you know and half of the links are dead but I die a little inside when I see a link and it says 404, or whatever.  I wish we had some sort of --
NOAH:  Archiving?
>> Kind of a way to say, kind of, you've got a 404, I'm going to automatically look on the Internet archive to see -- but yeah, I don't know.
>> I'm not a data journalist and so one thing that I actually -- we were talking a little bit about methodology and transparency and one thing that I think would be nice is to give the audience the benefit of the doubt and be a little bit more transparent about your process and your method and explain, you know, if you can walk me through your data, that's the story, that's the narrative and like, you can kill two birds with one stone there.  You can create a narrative but also talk a little bit about your methodology and be a little more transparent.  I think one of the great things about journalism, one of our jobs is to explain why it matters, or what it means, whereas that's not always the case with science.  So, the book doesn't stop with the data set.  It's like you still have to explain what it means.  So that's something that I would like to keep doing.
>> I agree.  The little box in the left-hand corner where no one's going to look, but going beyond that.  I think we're seeing more of it, like, bleed in from the open-source world where you're seeing more documentation -- oftentimes, I think by and large, that's around how we built the thing we built but yeah, definitely about, you know, reverse-engineering the reporting you did.  And Dan Nguyen, actually started these really good data diaries and how he obtained the data, and down to the SQL queries he asked the data set and I think we could definitely use more of that in the journalism community.
NOAH:  I think, on my own list had something on that which was more consistency on the way things are documented and packaged because that's a key element of the reproducibility because, like, if every project is starting from zero and how they decided to tell you about it, and how they make their code and everything, it discourages people from making the effort to reproduce it, so the more that we can make it easier to look at what a project is, and apply that scrutiny, then the more people are going to do it, I hope.
>> That's actually one of the problems that science lab is trying to fix because the reproducible code that's used, when executable code is part of some research project, that includes hard-coded paths and all this stuff, that makes it just completely not really useable.
>> And one other thing to the inherited data versus the original data, which seems kind of like an obvious direction data journalism is going, and it's interesting to me, because at what point -- we do all of the structures that scientists do.  But it's interesting to see it work.  I know NPR did something on stress.  And although it was buttressed by a lot of scientific studies, be sure but they also used surveys of people and it it was exciting a lot -- and I'm interested to know how like what process that went through.  Did they show it to scientists?  Was there, like, a statistician in one of the other organizations?  Or how you can be certain in what you're reporting if you don't have, like, that kind of process.
>> And that kind of goes to what I was suggesting in the sense of, like, lots of times just because someone did an experiment that proves something in science, you know?  It's like lots of times it's not accepted as fact, or you know, even begun to be entertained as fact until it's reproducible, and reconfirmed by others in the scientific world and we've seen this in journalism, in a lot of ways where someone will crunch like some census numbers, and do some model or something like that, and start we see consensus among the journalists, where we start to see these things begun to be treated as facts whereas, when the worse comes to worst, the first model comes out, and the first model published -- it's not a paper, it's a newspaper, right?  And then people are like, well, you know, it obviously works but it's probably like me, having just learned how to model this thing, helpings it up in R and being like, "I think it's right."  I don't want to speak for everyone, but at least that's my method.
NOAH:  So you would like to see more journalists trying to validity one another's work, and trying to reproduce them?
>> I think that --
>> Also review in a sense.  It's not just better editing.
>> And I also think just to add onto that.  This is something that I'm always tempted to do is to just do data diving as opposed to like real hypothesis testing.  So doing this huge data dump, and open it up, and make this scatter plot matrix and look at which things correlate, and look for outliers but you're definitely going to find false positives when you do that.  So just being rigorous about stating your hypothesis before decompressing that zip file, you know, that's kind of a huge, important step.
NOAH:  Having a hypothesis.  And to your point, also like would you like to see greater consultation between journalists that are sort of gathering information and actual scientists, of more advisory interactions between the two?  Is that somewhat the stress?
>> But isn't that what traditional reporting is?  Making sure to call up the experts?
>> I don't think it's just that.  I think it's also being very transparent with, like, what is your original -- and like what is scientific in the sense -- or what is something that may be anecdotal that you may be adding.  Because if it's done from a survey of too many people I don't know if that's -- just listening to that sentence, like we did a survey with a bunch of people, like, I don't know what that means, necessarily.
NOAH:  And I do think that in plenty of cases, it ends up being puddled in -- bundled in a science-y way.  But they didn't think of themselves as scientists and they didn't care to play it up that way.
>> And we also have an degree of chart decoration, too, to get weeded outdoor before getting peer-reviewed content especially if you're handed data source.  You're just reproducing straight out.  There's an amount of churn that we all do.  Where there isn't any new work.  It's just munching other things together, and putting it out in a slightly different layout so long as there's going to be projects of that nature asking for some more rigor of this stuff because this is just a rehash of this work over here, but I think that gets into ethical issues as to why you're even rehashing.  So that's a separate thing.  Just a for the wishlist, I would put a better model of what scientists do 'cause it sounds like a few things here are kind of, like, guesses or imaginations and some of them are, like, based on other news stories about science, or at least the pressure Lisa said, so what is peer review and why is it slow?  It's slow because I'm handing my work to my competitors and they have to approve before I can publish it so if there was a different model, it might be more manageable.  And when I hear, oh, the scientist use silly arcane language because they're so insulated, well, it's often the most efficient way to communicate precisely exactly what we need to say.  So it seems kind of like an assumption oh we're journalists out in the air and active and we're together to work for a while and we're going to find a way to do things that are interesting, ethical, price, fast, and underbudget.  So it's like, whoa.
NOAH:  So how would you like to see that come about in practice?  And how would you like to see working journalists be forced to work more closely with that process and the differences in that process.  Would that be something that when they're in school, when they're taking classes, they're forced to produce original research?
>> I mean, not to be adversarial, I imagine that you would learn by trial and error, and pretend that you invented it.  No, but yeah, I think talking to each other like everything else is a really good way.
>> How about in-house scientists?  Why not scientists?
>> Well, I think the field of science communication is becoming increasingly important and we could definitely use more of them.  More Neil Degrasse Tysons, or whatever.
>> What if we were to do this session like that?
NOAH:  That would be fascinating.
>> I'm sure they would agree to everything that we said.
>> Journalists are so cool!
>> Go journalism!  I watched House of Cards.
NOAH:  It is now past 5:30.  But I thought this was very interesting.  I hope you all did too.  Thank you for coming.  
