This is a DRAFT TRANSCRIPT from a live session at SRCCON 2014. This transcript should be considered provisional, and if you were in attendance (or spot an obvious error) we'd love your help fixing it. More information on SRCCON is available at http://srccon.org.

Captioning by the wonderful people of White Coat Captioning, LLC
whitecoatcaptioning.com



           SRCCON 2014
           Session 14 7-24-14, 1500-1600
           Garden 1
           "Interactives and Climate Change"
           Session leader(s): Brian Jacobs
           --
           
BRIAN:  All right, I guess let's do this.  Y'all get together?
>> Yeah, let's do it.
BRIAN:  So, there's some links up here.  The one on the bottom is basically what -- there's a lot of, like, reading material and basically, the deal is I'm just going to talk about -- kind of frame the issue a little bit and then break out into a few groups and then try to tackle some really specific stuff.  So the really specific stuff you'll just have to read the descriptions.  They're in both of these.  So I had originally called this section, "Interactives at the End of the World."  And I changed it to something a lot more boring because I didn't want to consider this as a sensationalist, doom-and-gloom scenario here, because that's very overwhelming and it's counterproductive.  And, I'm trying to consider more than just, you know, the climatology angle; the more of the psychological perspective here.  And there's been a lot of research done about that, about how you present the issue and the words you use to express this kind of topic.  But in the people that cover this stuff, you know, there is kind of a focus on disaster and kind of broader adaptation changes.  But I think there could be a lot more diversity on how you cover it and how just there's a lot of different ways to think of it.  And I think a big part of it is bringing into, like, a local perspective -- kind of getting people to understand that events around the world are -- well -- it's not happening directly to them, to yourself.  But it will.  And you need to start appreciating that.  And I think one -- so just before I talk about that, this is just a graph of coverage in the U.S. and it kind of peaked.  And these are for major newspapers and it kind of peaked in 2007, 2008, and it's kind of had peaks and valleys.
>> Is it based on a particular search term?
BRIAN:  It's a study of -- yeah, I guess -- it's a study on Washington Post, The Wall Street Journal, New York Times, all of the major newspapers, and I'm not sure how they quantify the articles but it's just counting the number of articles.
>> Mm-hmm.
BRIAN:  But I don't think -- I think it's less about the volume, and right -- about the type of coverage that could be given.  So, let's not focus on the global.  So there's three major angles to addressing climate change and it's not just disaster like after Sandy but it's about mitigation.  So how are we thinking about preventing it and adaptations?  So after a catastrophe, or accepting certain eventualities of it and then changing our behavior or our infrastructure.  And so after Sandy, there was a lot of kind of before and after coverage, which, I think is really interesting and it kind of motivates people to, you know, it makes it really real for them 'cause, you know, something's happened that's really intense.
           So how do -- I guess how do we -- I guess, we just want to make people more aware of the subtleties here and there.  So how do you make people more aware?  So we're talking about global atmospheric changes on the largest scale but they'll manifest locally, regionally in ecosystem changes and so human reality's there.  So, narrowing the topic:  In the west we're talking about in the U.S.  We're talking about, like, drought and wildfires.  This is, like, very general.  In human terms that's like water supply issues and, like, shelter issues.  In the east we're talking about flooding, hurricane effects, and in human terms, your house is flooding.  Or there are scarier things.  Uh, in a city, a superfund site, a massive contamination site might be near a flood-risk area and that will contaminate other flood-risk areas.  In the Midwest, we're talking extreme storms and the gulf, to name a few.  Flooding, fossil fuel, infrastructure damage, which has economic ramifications -- displaced population.  So this is all USA focused and there's a lot of tradeoffs with just covering the U.S.  And I think people more readily relate to things that are happening in their country and in their neighborhood.  But the effects will be felt more in, like, the global south or developing nations and because it's where there's higher populations and -- that are less able to adapt -- less readily able, I guess -- economically able to adapt to events that occur, cataclysmic events that occur.  So and with the climate models, the south is going to get hotter faster.  So developing countries will get worse but developed nations are responsible for most of the emissions.  So there's an argument to be made to try to increase attention to all this externally, so not focus on the U.S. issues.  But in terms of media coverage, how to make international problems not a distant kind of "not our problem" thing for an already-abstract, projected, kind of probabilistic thing that's out there.  Like, that's a huge challenge.  And it's the hardest challenge.  And you know, having one of these sessions, I don't want to try to -- I'm just throwing vague, scary things at you.  I want to try to, you know, do this a little more concretely.  So, how do we -- so how do we do this?  Here's one thing to try.  I, basically in that document, the Bitly one, basically if you're looking at it -- if you're going down to the bottom, there's this topic section.  I've basically compiled topics and domains to cover, facets to cover, phenomena that will occur and a certain perspective.  And I've basically just did kind of a random number generator and made a few scenarios of really, sort of specific things that we can break out into groups and try to talk about.  But I want to frame it in -- so what to think of, just visualizations or graphics or interactive anything.  Just a way to, using that, to put things into local scales and local contexts, which is challenging.  But I think Michael Keller did a really interesting thing -- who's in this room.  So basically there was this -- this is a good example of kind of bringing something foreign and bring it to a local context.  So, there was this Syrian Refugee Crisis, basically.  And he basically, you might have seen this, it's Al Jazeera.  You kind of pick where you live and it shows the, kind of where a refugee population would fit in your neck of the woods.  So around Gainsville, Florida, if my Internet's good, it'll show you kind of the population distribution.  It'll show you, if you're from there, that's kind of a shit ton of people and it kind of makes it a little more real in where you live.  So that's one example of bringing something foreign, making it closer.  So in terms of climate change, maybe we can do something along these lines.  But, you know...
>> Sorry.
BRIAN:  This is just what I do.  I guess let's split out into groups and I can assign you a really specific scenario and kind of think about something interactive that needs to be made and try to put it, depending on where you're from, try to put it into your own terms and try to -- yeah, you guys are smart.  So, all right.  Let's say group one over here.  Somebody who can write this down or is looking at the document, this is the -- you're going to cover the demographic impact of disaster stemming from coastal flooding in urban Indonesia.  Really specific, but you gotta get specific with this stuff because it'll, like, melt your brain because it's so overwhelming.  So, take your best shot.  In group two, let's do these guys.  You're going to -- you have to tell me -- so I have infrastructure for adaptation to thermohaline and circulation changes, so that's the global current of the ocean and how that relates to municipality government.  Do you guys know what, like, the general effects of thermohaline circulation slow-down?
>> Like El Niño?
>> No, I think it'll exacerbate El Niño.  It'll cool Europe, essentially.
>> Yeah, it's like this exaggerated to a thousand times.  It's day after tomorrow, right?
BRIAN:  Yeah, it's exaggerated ten times.  Screw that one.  Economics of mitigation of wildfires in the western U.S. from an ecosystem perspective.  Okay?  And over here?
>> Aqua?
BRIAN:  Yeah, that's aquaculture and mitigation of ocean simplification from the Pacific Northwest from a local industry perspective.
>> I don't know if you're allowed to pick.
BRIAN:  I gave a lot here and it's random anyways.  So, you know, take notes and you can present back if you come up with anything cool.
>> So what do you expect us to actually present with?
BRIAN:  I am expecting either an idea for a visualization, or a graphic, or something interactive, or data sets you want to use, or things that might exist already?
>> So it's a draft kind of -- if we were to actually do a project, actually?
BRIAN:  But keeping in mind making the whole thing successful, too.  Not just you; but another population.
>> Right.
BRIAN:  It's a pretty complicated directive but, yeah... go for it.
           [ Group Discussion ]
           
           Okay, who wants to go first?  You guys?
           >> Okay.
           >> Okay, our theme that we were tasked with trying to show was demographic -- the demographic impact of disasters of coastal flooding in Indonesia.  And so we are just brainstorming, like, what data should we try and look for and see what's available and then what could we do with that, what could we show?  And so what data we were looking for was, like, which areas, like, were prone to flooding, like, across the globe sock so maybe we could, like, compare it with where people live, you know, if Indonesia was similar to, like, Florida.  Records of past floods in Indonesia from year to year, and maybe if we could, you know, find a trend in how bad these floods have been, we can pair that with, like, climate change projections, like, water level projections.  Like, how that would sort of predict how much worse the flooding could be later.  Yeah, like I said before, how many cities where's prone to flooding and then looking at the water-regulating infrastructures of various cities, like, you could do an infographic or something that would show how levies were, when they were last built, maintained, and I guess I won't go through all of them but the thing that we kind of settled on, is like, maybe something like a narrative that kind of allows -- that puts users in the place of a flood victim and, maybe, it's, you know, you could show two scenarios, like one that is if, like, you know if this flood were similar to the last major flood that happened and then side-by-side show a projection of how the flooding is expected to worsen in, like, ten or 20 years and then show, like, the difference of what happens compensate it would be sort of like a timeline thing like, three days before the flood, it's kind of like a "choose your own inadvertent."  You have a choice to make, should I either flee the region, or should I stay?  And then at that time, you know, we talked about maybe kind of showing sort of a, you know -- because as the user we could see, we could predict, like, what would actually happen in the future.  So if, you know, if it's three days before the flood and you've chosen to stay, you know, you're no longer able to flee the region on food, or by bicycle, or something.  Now, you can only flee it if you own it car.  So that would be kind of -- that would be an example of how your socioeconomic status would impact that, or, you know, whether you have kids.  Maybe that means that you only have four days to flee bring the flood instead of, um -- or instead of, like, two.  What else?
BRIAN:  Cool, cool.  Can you wrap it up quick so that we can finish up everybody?
>> Sorry.
BRIAN:  No, that's good.
>> Is that it?
>> Yeah?
>> That sums it up.
BRIAN:  You guys?
>> We don't have the visual aid here.
>> Um, so we had economics of mitigation of wildfires in western U.S. from an ecosystem perspective and we talked along ideas around that, looking at kind of two trends of, you know, increased fire -- well we wanted to investigate how urbanization has affected what fire zones -- what areas are in fire zones and how intense those fires might be.  And then, look at where people are living and if that puts them in increased risk areas, or you're creating spots that were not fire zones that are now fire zones.  So we kind of spent time looking at well, what existing data is there?  And it turns out there are some data sets.
>> Turns out, the government has fire data going back to the 80s, so you can get every single fire that's ever happened back to 1980-something.  So we were thinking it might be phone where you can build something where you would put in your address and see where fires have been, how often, if they've increased, or decreased over time, and then look at kind of the urban density and the change in urban density to where the most fires happen.
>> And then, also looking at this idea you were talking about, is it a complex issue?  You know, you can't stop fires totally.  So you're either delaying it, or increasing it.  So a fire happens, and you're kind of looking at three, I guess kind of like characters, either an animal or a person in that ecosystem and how they're affected by it.  Some are benefited, some aren't.
>> I mean, sort of exploring this idea ought we, ought we not mitigate forest fires?  What are the factors involved?
BRIAN:  So when it comes to ecosystems, you guys are thinking human ecosystem?
>> Well, that was the urbanization one, but we also talked about the ideas like sort of, you know, was it an area that wasn't used fires and now that ecosystem's changed or how it has been benefited by the existence of fires.
>> And whether or not humans are building into areas that were previously wild, wild lands or national forests or stuff like that, and how that's affecting the fire risk.
BRIAN:  Cool.  Nice.
>> Yeah, so we were talking about a simplification about oceans, specifically in the Northwest.  Yeah, so I guess I can, like, talk about our thought process.  I mean, we basically kind of wanted to make a narrative of that.  There is both kind of a natural, "We are kind of hurting the world with pollution and therefore, there's a certification there's also a financial impact on fishermen."  So I guess the goal is to create more of the towards people who don't necessarily live in fishing communities but are definitely contributing to the problem.  So we talked over a number of different ideas.  I think, you know, we can look at, like, the Northwest as, like, the starting point, right, because I think that was our objective but -- or the simplification of your world in general, but there's patterns all over the world.  So showing people -- I mean we were looking at changes from the 1700s onwards to 2100 -- there are predictions.  And, whether or not this can reverse-develop.  I mean, there was obviously some research we didn't do, right?  But kind of painting the picture to people who don't really understand where the acidification is coming from.  People may understand that it's pollution but what does that mean, right?  Is there a majority of, you know, companies that are, like, producing stuff in factories that are, like, contributing to this?  And what are, like -- obviously the government has sort of "I don't get it, at least in carbon taxes."  So even around the world, what are different policies that the government has mandated companies to, like, you know, put filters, like, on their stacks or whatever?  And so looking at the changes and showing that.  Yeah, so we left a couple of different models to actually show this in terms of, like, actually showing different areas of the ocean with different levels of acidity in them, what that actually looks like in terms of the landscape.  Obviously, kind of showing that kind of gives a direct view of that.
>> Yeah, I was interested in whether we would be able to build aquatic economic profile of different regions so that we can compare them across the Pacific Northwest, for example, what other regions of the world is it most similar to, and how this acidification is going to impact it and similar for any other region that depends on fishing is on a coast.
>> Yeah, and show the global projections of acidification so that we can see the economic impact that's impending on other regions.
BRIAN:  I think that's interesting -- the -- what part of the world you're most similar to and in reverse, what part of the world they're most similar to.
>> Yeah.
>> Which ocean are you?
>> It's a BuzzFeed quiz.
BRIAN:  So it's 4:00.  Did anyone have anything in general they wanted to discuss?
>> I sort of did.  It was in the brief for this talk -- something about how do we think about breaking off pieces of topics that are this big.  So, I think that there's something interesting in the idea of, like, repeatedly doing such specific things on a huge topic.  But always something quite different.  So, all of these projects that we've just discussed -- if they were to come to life, if it was one a month, or something, build up from the ground of these comprehensive ideas of all the impacts of climate change as opposed to, like, the one master interactive that's going to help you understand climate change, does that make sense?
BRIAN:  No, it makes sense.  If every interactive thing or if every story that you make had to cover the topic comprehensively, you would be paralyzed.
>> Well, I think there's a tendency to do that, at least in my own mind there is.
BRIAN:  Well, I'm not sure what the real barriers are newsrooms of the specific policies are -- whether it's the newsrooms.  But it's a big question.
>> Are you experienced with climate projects?
BRIAN:  I guess I'm working on environmental projects.  It's got the climate component but I don't have a particular background in it.  I'm just interested like many in --
>> I'm just thinking if there's, like, similar patterns to the problems that we were talking about.
BRIAN:  Um...
>>  that -- that would -- yeah.
>> I used to work at Gris, and one problem that we had, or one problem that existed in that universe was connecting specific issues like this in the public mind to big ideas like climate change like you talk about wildfires or reefs or fish, or something.  People don't automatically associate big policy issues.  So it's an interesting metaproblem when doing these kinds of things.
>> Right, which is why if it's understood if all these things that you're doing are a part of a greater push of your organization to cover climate change and these are just, like, several specific things that you've done under that, I think it should be easier to relate to -- to your picture, maybe.
BRIAN:  Well, it's a balance.  A balance between the bigger picture and not becoming kind of, numbed by how big the bigger picture is.  Related to the bigger picture but keep it as, you know, palatable as possible.  I don't know if that's the word.  Well, I guess we should move out.  Thanks, everyone.
>> Thank you.